So nervous this minister.
Put another, can we get another chair on this
One? On the end here?
Grab one on, still that chair.
This one over here. We'll stick another one there.
And as long
as I sit down and miss it.
No. Yeah, I'll take action. Okay. Right.
That one's free too. Chris. Yeah. Chris. Chris.
Kristen coming in here with me.
So much interest. Sorry, not much room.
Is there No snappy that everyone's so excited.
It's not one of the biggest standing room only.
You've never been known to travel light though, have you?
I do, actually. I travel only hand luggage.
True story. Oh, joke.
Have me on, mate. Yeah.
Sorry. Just to confirm, we're I can photos?
Yeah. I don't normally travel with immediate though.
I like to travel faster. Yes. I'm here tonight.
Oh, I'll text you when I'm finished. I'm here till six.
I'm here. So are you. I'll be in the building.
Literal run out seats. Okay, cool. Alright.
Good chance of stealing. Anyhow,
as much as we can do,
Here we go.
Okay.
Right. I think we are just about all seated.
Good afternoon, minister of Defense
and Minister of Veterans, wonderful
to have you here with your teams.
Really appreciate you joining us for this
introductory hearing
as we start our scrutiny week activities on the Foreign
Affairs Defense and Trade Committee.
Uh, we have obviously MOD and NZDF
before our committee over the next few hours,
but we're very pleased to have both of you here, uh,
in your respective capacities is Minister of Defense,
associate Minister of Defense
and Minister of Veterans, uh,
to answer committee's questions
and give some oversight, uh, some views around
where we're tracking some of the challenges as you see them,
and some of the amazing work being done
by our fantastic service personnel here in New Zealand.
So, look, with that I will hand over to you
for some introductory comments and then I'm
Sure much and Sure. We have plenty of
questions. Look, I really appreciate the
opportunity to talk to you.
I've got a, a long speech.
I'm not gonna talk to it, um, primarily
because I know we've only, uh, Chris Pink, uh,
the Associate Minister of Defense, minister of Veterans
and I, we're only here for half an hour.
So I want to leave as much time as possible for questions
before you interrogate the Secretary of Defense
and the Chief Defense Force.
Um, but I will just say as an introductory comment,
that defense, uh, is involved in cyclones,
earthquakes, volcano, illegal, unregulated un border
of fishing, uh, transnational crime, ceremonial events,
Antarctica, VIP and Trade Delegations, MIQ
and vaccination programs, search
and Rescue, deterrence,
international Nations, uh, all of this.
They're training other forces like Ukrainians
to be trainers.
They're working, um, with snipers,
teaching people to be snipers.
They're main marine
ordinance there all over the place.
And they are a military force as well.
So you're doing enormous amount of work.
We didn't have defense. We would have to invent them.
So I just want to get that really clear.
Um, very much valued. Valued.
And they, however, have obviously been
through really difficult times
and um, you know, it's not over yet.
It's still gonna be difficult,
but really happy to take any questions.
And Chris, did you want to, a few words to
Thank you obviously support those comments about the
breadth of work that our service keeper do.
We're grateful for their service.
Um, and I'm certainly happy to turn over the time,
um, to Mr.
Chair and your team. Um, just acknowledging, um, C-D-F-C-D,
very informed civilian
personnel, of course, secretary Affairs.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Alright,
questions, pen. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you to both, uh, ministers
and team that have come in with you today.
And can I endorse your words about a huge gratitude
and thanks to the work that our service personnel
and civilian staff do, uh, right around the world.
So thank you very much. Um, minister, um, Collins,
you'll know that the, uh, number one
matter certainly in the, in the list of priorities for much
of the public is the mani.
Uh, and we welcome the call for the inquiry.
We also welcome the interim update, uh, on that last week.
Uh, I wondered if you would like to share, uh, any further,
um, thoughts
or comments around the interim update of last week, uh,
and anything that you might be able to share on the man?
Well, no, um, really clear that this is the process
required under the Armed Forces Discipline Act.
The Navy has been running this program
and this course, which is a commissioner of inquiry, a court
of inquiry, rather, they've done exactly
what they said they'd do, which is
to give an interim report when they could.
There is a full report,
final report coming out in the first quarter of next year.
Uh, there will be decisions made
around i discipline issues as well.
They are complying exactly with the law.
And I think, uh, not only exactly with the law,
but actually by making the interim, the, the contents
as such of the findings of the interim report known
to the public, they have exceeded
what many people would've thought would've happened.
They're doing an excellent job and I support them.
Uh, supplementary. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, in the interim update last week, uh, uh, yourself
and the chief of Navy mentioned the salvage operations
starting on the 16th of December.
Um, I put to you from sources on the ground
that there is a lot of, um, unhappiness around what appears
to be any lack of attempt to salvage
or support local community, uh,
and the time since the sinking.
Um, do you have any comment on that? Yeah,
Like unlike you, um, uh, former Minister Henry,
I'm not embarrassed by the Navy or the Defense Force.
Um, I actually think that they're doing an excellent job.
They're dealing with a situation
where there is diesel in tanks.
They need to get that diesel off.
The Navy does not in the habit
of having situations like this.
So they're having to deal with people
who are experienced in being able to remove that.
And then what happens to the ship?
The wreck is something which is going to be decided in,
in consultation with the government of Samoa, which has been
very clearly involved all the way through and kept involved.
And there may be some unhappiness, um, on the ground.
But I think the vast majority of people are very aware
that the Navy was there undertaking work
to support the Chaga hosting by Samo.
And they have been scrupulous in making sure
that they fronted up, turned up working it,
that they had divers in their almost straight away dealing
with everything they could.
And they have been, I exemplary in their behavior.
A final question on that matter. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, with that in mind
and, um, the, the tragedy of the sinking of the, um,
of course it puts a strain on the rest of the fleet, um,
and the challenge around readiness
and we know the challenge around concurrent events.
I wanna minister if you had any, uh, view, or,
or is there a plan
or have you discussed the plan in over the past, uh,
few months since the sinking of the mannu about how the Navy
and the NZDF at large might be able
to continue to support operation?
No, it's a, it's a thoughtful question. Thank you.
The, I don't see this sinking as a tragedy
because nobody lost their lives.
No one was seriously injured.
If people had lost their lives and we had 73
or 75 body bags coming back on those
planes, that would be a tragedy.
This is extremely, uh, unhappy situation.
The Navy did not ask for this to happen.
Nobody set out one day to have a terrible day at work,
but clearly, um, a few people have had a terrible day.
It is terrible,
but it is not, not a tragedy in terms of body bags.
In addition to that, um, when you talk about the ability
to be able to crew the Navy that, um, I've inherited the
Minister of Defense is one that was already, um,
already had ships tied up at the dock.
And the reason wharf then, the reason for
that is they didn't have enough crew.
And that is because they suffered
17.7% attrition rates in the last year
when you were the minister.
And they are now down to 7.2.
So they are actually recovering.
They do have some, a couple of ships that they,
and particularly one ship, um, the Otago
that they are looking to get ready to go out
and undertake most of the work that the Mani was able
to take and that the crew will be able
to be redeployed on that.
So we will have one leader ship tied up at dock.
We will have, um, those, that crew absolutely redeployed,
and we will be back out there with our tails up, not down.
We'll be out there doing the job.
And I'm really proud, proud of the way that the chief
of Navy has stepped up on this.
Thank you. Supplementary question from Tiano. Ano,
Uh, thank you minister for those reflections.
I know many of us, um, were, uh, wondering about the state
of, of what's happening with the Mannu.
Uh, I do have just one question
and that's around food sovereignty.
'cause I know that folks
that are living in those near villages had questions
around the support around making sure
that they could get Kai could get food.
So I was wondering if that's actually the, the kind of work
that's been done in that space.
It's probably the sort of detail I will ask defense.
And perhaps if you, when you've got 'em for two hours
for questioning, you could ask them about Kai.
Thank you. It's not really my area,
but I don't think anyone's gone, you know,
been missing in terms of that.
But there will be some people who felt very upset
and whose natural, um, fish,
basically fish gathering have been interrupted.
And that is very, very difficult for people.
Thank you. Um, and so I have a question in relation to the
geostrategic challenges globally,
but specifically in our region.
And we've seen over a period of time now increasing tension.
That's an area that I think it's important
that New Zealand has become more aware
of the challenges in our home region in particular.
Most recently we saw a very concerning test
of an ICBM from China in the region.
And I'm wondering if you can give us some reflections on
your views of what's happening in the Pacific
and the concerning areas.
Yeah, it's actually really, um, concerning that,
particularly the last year when I've been focused on this,
is just how different, different the geo
strategic environment is than it was a few years ago.
Um, the intercontinental ballistic missile that China
launched across from its launch site in China to past, uh,
Kiribas, um, is about the same distance as it would be from
that same launch site to New Zealand.
Um, it is not, um, you know,
obviously I've raised this issue
and I've been assured
that it is a routine training exercise.
Well, the last time that
that training exercise was undertaken was 44 years ago.
So I'm not quite sure how routine this would be,
but I do think it's seemed a very strong signal.
It is, it was launched into the South Pacific, uh,
nuclear free zone.
It was, uh, it didn't have a, it didn't have a,
a warhead on it, but it could have,
and it was, I think, very concerning.
We are also obviously the Navy
and the Air Force, uh, um,
involved in doing things like taking the AUO through the,
um, south China Sea, all these sorts of things going on.
The, the tensions
around South South China Sea at the Taiwan straits
are very tense.
I mean, the, um, I was in
the Shangri La defense dialogue earlier this year,
and the discussions particularly from, uh, Philippines,
about what was happening in,
in the area in the South China Sea, uh,
it was not a friendly, it was not a
friendly situation going on there.
And then of course, we have North Korea
and it sanctions busting behavior as well
as North Korea now sending troops, having sent troops
to help Russia with their illegal.
Um, and by frankly I moral invasion of Ukraine,
these are not, not happy times in the world,
and particularly in our area too, where tensions are,
are getting, um, quite fought
and a lot of work going on in with Pacific nations around,
um, some of the things that they are facing as well.
Supplement China. Yeah, supplementary Tim Costley
Yeah. Mean's
something. You, you talk about South China Sea,
Korean ula, I see those kind of areas in particular, a and
and I noticed that, you know,
over the last year in particular, there's been renewed
enthusiasm for relationships with Japan with, uh,
South Korea new military missions announced to that area.
Um, and I think about keep being on about the, the,
the IP four Australia, Japan, South Korea and New Zealand
and, and, and the importance of that relationship,
I guess across the broader Indo-Pacific region.
I'm just wondering what your reflections are on the
importance of those relationships.
And as a second part, just to get it out now,
so you can answer, but you speak
of Korean troops fighting in Ukraine, um, and,
and I noticed that you attended the foreign minister's
meeting this time in, um,
the native foreign minister's meeting, which is relatively,
we defense minister's meeting defense minister's meeting.
Sorry, um, apologies.
Um, but, but why do you think it is that NATO are
inviting you to be part of that?
Is it, you know, they obviously have an eye to this part
of the world as well, and I just wonder if you have any
reflections on both that sort of IP four relationship,
but also the links into places like nato? I think
We should underestimate how democracies
and, uh, countries where people have freedom of speech
and freedom of movement, uh, tend to want
to stick together when it comes to things like defense.
And so the IP four, this was the very first time
that the defense ministers had been invited to join
with the NATO defense ministers, um,
in October this year in Brussels.
And what was clear is
that the NATO defense ministers are very invo, very aware
of what's happening in the Indo-Pacific region, um,
and particularly around, uh, Taiwan, around
the South China Sea, around Korea,
but they're also aware of what's going on in the Pacific.
And, and they see it as valuable
because just like them, they, they're looking at
and saying, well, Russia is a Pacific nation.
Uh, North Korea could say that they are very aware
that we can't just sit in a little bubble
and say, well, it's not, it's not us.
It's someone else's problem.
And what they're seeing is the same sort of thing happening
where the whole world is very connected
and they view it very seriously.
And, and, and do you, um,
what I'm trying to say, the, the, do you get a sense of,
uh, would you get feedback from, from those kind
of meetings on New Zealand and our defenses placed in the
world, how we are viewed in terms
of stepping up contributions to Japan, South Korea,
and even thinking across to the mission towards sort
of Yemen and free shipping that areas?
Yeah. Well, people are seeing
that we're stepping up a lot more this year.
So they've seen that, um, we are easier to deal with.
We are more likely to, uh, take up opportunities.
And of course, one of the reasons for us doing that,
it's not only just being good, good global citizens,
but it's because it's in our interests.
So when it comes to going through the South China Sea and,
and also the Red Sea work that is all, all about, um,
the United Nations, uh, convention
and Law of the Sea, that's about,
for a small trading nation like us, we know
what happens when we can't get shipping through, uh,
we all pay money or we lose export opportunities and
or we don't get products.
So it is very important that we stand up for those.
We are a signatory to it, we take it seriously.
Um, but I think, you know, as I say, what are they seeing?
They're seeing us more involved.
They're seeing us stepping up.
I mean, New Zealand has,
for many years been the second largest contributor
to the un, um, uh, in South Korea,
and we've stepped up again on that.
But for our troops, our soldiers, sailors,
and our, our air, our aviators for them
being deployed keeps them excited and interested
and doing what they joined for.
They did not join to do MIQ, but they did it.
They did not, you know, they did not join the SAS to go
and look after five oh ones coming back from Australia
as they had to do during these, the covid times.
But they do actually join to do what they're trained to do,
and that's what they need.
And it's one of the reasons we've got the attrition rates
right down now to one of the lowest levels we've had
after a year after some of the highest attrition rates is
because they're getting to do what they joined for.
And I just wanna follow that up.
Sticking to the personnel side,
and obviously there's been some media recently
around the civilian personnel from defense.
Um, it's an area that I'm interested in your take on
where we sit within that we have a, a significant portion
of our broader of defense personnel, uh, civilian.
Now, um, I'm interested in your take on whether
that is appropriate.
Have we potentially gone too far in civilianizing the
defense workforce as it were?
Um, and what do you think is, is the right balance there?
Yeah, well it's, it's, it's always something
that the CDF has to be very aware of.
And you know, I say at the moment, we have 11,861
force including,
and part of it a 3,171 are civilians,
1 78 contractors.
So the proportions are, you know,
quite high on the civilian.
And it might be that in some regards,
that's a bit high compared to the uniform staff.
And why I say that is earlier today when I mentioned some
of the things that defense does, um, a lot
of those are only going to be undertaken on the front lines
by the uniform staff.
Mm. So they're ones who the CDF can order to do things.
They're the ones who will turn up rain shower
or, you know, hail or snow.
They're the ones who are gonna be out
dealing with the cyclone.
Um, the civilian staff, uh, do some very,
very valuable work, particularly, um, some
of the work supporting, um, these, these frontline troops.
But the fact is, is that CDF has to
call on his, on his uniform staff to do the search
and rescue, to do the
MIQI didn't notice any civilian staff, um,
volunteering for that one
or the cyclone, you know, cyclone Gabrielle.
So he is gotta have the right proportions,
and that's going to change.
I think after Dean Review, there was an all out ization,
and I think it may right now,
with the attrition rates we've been suffering have maybe
gone a little bit the other way,
but it's up to having to make those calls
and he's gotta be able free to do that.
Our next question, Greg O'Connor.
Yeah, thanks Mr. Um,
just wondering if you have any concerns about, um, any
of the three branches being able to achieve their strategic
sort of goal goals that they had for this year.
And, and if you have been briefed that they may not be able
to achieve them, which areas would you like
to see them focusing on
or, um, perhaps an area that, uh,
you think they could put aside?
Look, everything's tight.
You know, I mean, the, um, everything's tight.
It's tight in terms of personnel, it's tight,
everything's tight in terms of money, everything is,
so we can't waste anything.
But, you know, in terms of, um, of any key work,
I'm not aware of anything they can't actually do
other than the fact that, you know,
we can't do all sorts of things together.
So for instance, um, you know, a cyclone at the same time
as an earthquake, as the same time as something else, we,
we might not be able to do everything to the level
that we'd want, but we always do something.
Um, and I think that's one of the points
that they we're always gonna have limited resources in a
country that is physically largely United Kingdom in a
population of just over 5 million.
We're never going to have people everywhere, every place.
But the other thing I should also mention too is we have a
reserve force as well, which is pulled in and,
and it helps in all sorts of areas.
Um, so yeah, I'm not, I'm not aware of them not being able
to achieve what they have to do,
but I think all the forces, um,
the Navy got massively hit by attrition.
Um, the Air Force got hit, the army got hit,
but, um, you know, the Navy has now starting build up
and the, you know, the minimum losses is, you know,
heartbreaking to people,
which is why they really need our support
on our condemn condemnation.
So you haven't been briefed on any
particular area that's at
Risk? I think, no. I
think everything's hard.
Everything's hard,
but I'm not aware of things not being done.
You know, defense forces doing its job that I'm aware of.
Um, they're out there every time, anytime we need them,
that they're doing things, but it's always gonna be hard.
So, so, so, sorry, so you haven't been briefed,
there's been nothing being pointed out
to you that is at risk?
No, no. I'm not quite sure what you're talking about.
Oh, no. Just, uh, any briefings you may have had
that we're gonna really struggle to achieve this part
of our strategic plan for any of the forces. Look,
This has been a rebuilt this year.
This has been a, um, a real focus on getting everyone up
and running and deployed and things.
So I'm not aware of anything there.
Is there anything that you can think of CDF
that I might be missing here?
Um, our output, our level, level of outputs is, um,
it's reduced, say from pre covid times
or during, uh, COVID times.
Um, and that is not just as a, a, uh, result of the, uh,
high fiscal situation, but of the high attrition.
Uh, we've had, um, getting ships
to see as being problematic.
But, um, with, um, a new chief of Navy coming in,
he's really, uh, pushed that hard.
And we've now got a Navy who's energized,
enthusiastic on strong sense of purpose and, uh,
and ready to go to sea.
We've, we've had some big deployments, uh,
this year from the Navy, but the,
the question I would say is, where, where have we not been,
where we've supposed to have been, uh,
in this last 12 months?
Yeah, I guess that's the question.
Yeah, we've always, we've always delivered
what the minister's saying is that, um,
whereas in previous years, there's an expectation
that we can do multiple things concurrently.
Uh, we do struggle with that at the moment,
but we know where we need to rebuild, um, neck up the,
because, you know, the, the strategic environment needs us
to be covering, uh, as much as we can. Did
You have, so just talking to that, uh, recruitment level,
you talked about the attrition numbers.
I think now for the first time in multiple years,
we've actually seen a net
increase in the number of personnel.
Can you perhaps give us some insight around
what you think might be driving that?
Oh, I think they're gonna be on deployments, don't they?
Yeah. It's what they always say to me.
You ask those young people when they're graduating
or in the Navy, you know, or something like that, or Army
or Air Force, why did you join?
They always, I want to, I want to serve my country
and see the world minister, right?
And it's like, guess what? Let's let them do that.
Next slide. Uh, yeah, quick supplementary,
Supplementary. You
CDF just mentioned that sort
of outputs are down a little bit, but,
but when I read the annual report, op Antarctica is up by,
you know, 23%, um, domestic a d calling, uh,
school outs 20% up.
Um, fisheries flying hours at two
and a half times what they were the year before.
SAR is more than double police. Flying is double custom.
Sea days are almost double. Yeah.
It looks like you're having a really busy year compared
to the, to the one before.
Yep. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
But everything's always tight. There's always need for more,
but I understand they're not mucking around,
they're not staying at home, so it's only
Compared to years ago that Oh, yeah. But down.
Right. What do you,
while we've got Minister Pink, do you want to ask
Him? Yes. Yeah. So Greg
O'Connor has a
question, uh, veterans related
Question. Oh, I was just wondering if you
wanted
to make an opening statement or, ah,
In the Traditional manner.
He mentioned he was happy to give us
the opportunity to ask questions.
Well, in the answer that, um, thank you.
Um, just in relation to the, we're a Gardner case. Yes.
So we're a Gardner case. Yes.
Um, obviously now the decision's been made to appeal.
Um, again, um, just wondering whether that's something that,
uh, you know, you, you had approved
or signed off as as minister,
and whether it's something you think is, is the, a good use
of, uh, of the funds. Yeah,
Thanks for the opportunity to, to talk to that case.
You'll appreciate that I need to be circumspect about that.
And, and all other government ministers,
including the Attorney General as it happens, would,
would wish me to do that for constitutional, uh, reasons.
Um, obviously we respect, uh, respect the fact that, um, uh,
the court and also, um, with the veterans, um,
entitlement appeal board have, you know,
considered the question and, and
reached their determination.
Uh, obviously, you know, there's water yet
to flow under the bridge in terms of where
that may land, uh, legally.
And, and of course from a veteran's affairs perspective,
they need to consider, uh, the situation as it now stands.
And in terms of what that means for processing times
of veterans claims, if the net effect of the decision,
again, emphasizing as it currently stands, uh, is
that there are more people who are eligible for services,
uh, for which there's been an appropriation.
And the appropriation across success of governments has been
for a certain number, uh, of expected claimants.
So if that's broader, then we'll need to consider the,
uh, implications for that.
In the meantime, it's been really pleasing that, um,
veterans Affairs has turned its mind to, uh,
system improvements, but also additional resources in the
last budget, some $4 million over four years has been
appropriate at addition to, in addition to
what was previously available, so that those, um,
processing claims and now down by 17% from their peak.
So we are moving in the right direction, albeit with
that caveat, um, that we might need to consider
what the implications will be if the decision around, um,
Tawa gardener, um, uh, stands effectively, you know, with,
you know, with, with legal processes here to play out.
Sorry, Mr. Just on that 17%, is
that the wait time or the number?
No, no apologies. That's, that's the number of, um,
open cases, um, the, the wait times. Um, yes,
If you could give us some insight on that,
because I know it's been an issue over the last few years.
We've had unreasonably long wait times for
Processing veterans banks. Yeah,
that's right. And I've, I've seen you been happy
to acknowledge, um, previous to coming into my current role
and, um, and, and as others have, and,
and certainly coming into the role of veterans affairs, uh,
veterans Minister, that, that it's too long, um,
that people have been waiting to,
to have their claims processed, um,
around the one year mark in, in the case
of I think the disabled, um, disablement pension.
Um, others will correct me if I'm stray too far, um,
numerically, but, um, suffice to say too long, um,
we are making, um, steps in the right direction for that,
both as to the number of open claims
and also the timeframes, the average processing timeframes.
But I should point out with the average processing
timeframes as we, um, close older cases
that have not been able to be resolved sometimes
because the veteran himself or herself hasn't
provided any serious information, the, the, the,
the average age of the claim doesn't come down much.
'cause of course, those older claims having been resolved
after, you know, five plus years in some cases contributes
to that average processing time appearing quite large,
but certainly making it a move in the right direction there.
Thank you. Our next question from Dana Kirkpatrick,
You just asked my question.
That's okay. No, my question was around processing
Times and what work had been done Okay.
In that space. So thank you. We can move on.
Greg, comment. Yeah,
If I can go back to the, or Gardner case then, I mean,
it has had quite a life through the courts.
Um, it's going back to the high court again.
I just wonder in light of
what we saw this year from the solicitor general
being quite contrite, that she had continually gone back
and fought these cases on behalf of the Crown.
That where there might be a parallel here
that we are going now, going back to court,
high court yet again.
Um, and using the resources of the state, um,
rather than the act as you'll be well aware, um, does say
if in doubt, um, really, um, within, without the legalese,
um, we should really rule in favor of the applicant.
So just again, going back to court
to the high court yet again. Yeah,
I, I understand the thrust of the question,
although obviously I won't go near anything that's
outside the particulars of, of the target Gardner case
as it sits within Veterans Affairs,
and of course even then being respectful
of further court processes yet to play out.
But I would say it is a worthwhile function of the state
to clarify how legislation should be
interpreted, um, in this case.
Um, the, the live question is the way in which, um,
claims can be assessed relative to the statements
of principle, which is, uh,
what I think most people would've understood in the passing
of the veteran support Act 2014, would be the way
that we measure, uh, whether claims, um, attract competence
or, um, uh, um, entitlement around injury
or illness for qualifying operational service.
And, and that's, that's, um, determined by the relationship
to statements of principle.
So the benefit of the doubt, um, accrues to the question
of whether, uh, an injury illness related to that fact of
that service or might be incidental.
So the balance of the ball goes in favor of the veteran in
that context and the, the, the gardener case, um,
potentially broadens it further still.
So again, it's an exercise in clarification.
Um, and I should just mention while I have the opportunity
that of course, um, whatever the result of, of this case is,
um, there is nothing that I would say
or the government would say, I'm sure anyone would say
that would lessen the manner of his service.
And so, so it's worth, um, depersonalizing, um,
the scenario from that point of view.
Although, of course, because it's a legal case,
we do reference the, the surname of the applicant
Council anymore either.
Do we? Thank you. We do have a Supreme Court. Excellent.
Yes. Alright, that brings us to an end the public session
with both ministers.
Thank you very much for your time this afternoon.
We appreciate it. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Alright, we will move straight into the hearing
with n Death and MOD.
Alright.
Yes.
Right.
All right here, Marshall. Tony Davies, chief of Defense.
Welcome, Brooke Barrington, secretary of Defense.
Welcome along. We appreciate you being
with us today along with your team.
Uh, we have three hours sit down for an in-depth review
of both Ministry of Defense and New Zealand Defense Force.
Today you have received a structured agenda from us
identifying the key themes that the committee would like
to scrutinize, along with some suggested time allocations.
Beside those, uh, we will be focusing this review primarily
as it is an annual review on what has happened
through the 2324 year, uh, with some leeway
to talk about operations up into today
and looking forward from a strategic, uh, perspective
that is all within scope, uh, individual work programs.
Looking at, uh, where
that may be going in the future is getting into the weeds.
So we'll pull outside the scope of the annual review.
Uh, we welcome your introductory comments and,
and then there'll be questions from members
as we proceed through.
Uh, look, we're not going to adhere rigidly
to those timeframes.
We will allow flexibility for members to scrutinize
area if there was greater interest in one area over another.
Uh, but we will be guided by that agenda
as it is laid out for us.
Over to you for some introductory comments.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
I note that the Ministry of Defense has, has first up, so,
um, I'll start
and thank you for the opportunity to speak
to the committee this afternoon alongside my
colleague, uh, the CDF.
Uh, as the minister pointed out in her opening remarks,
the environment in which we are operating is more
challenging than it has been for decades.
With that in mind, I'd like
to focus these brief remarks on three key themes, the role
of the Ministry of Defense
or of defense, uh, wr large, the ministry's
responsibilities, and then the challenges ahead.
Firstly, an acknowledgement that at its core
defense is the protection of our borders, our people,
our national, uh, values, and our national interests.
This means the personnel of the Defense Force must be able
to operate effectively at home
and further afield in a variety of contexts, from civil
to military, from peace building to war, fighting
alone, and with others.
It's quite a big ask of small force.
New Zealand's increases are global
and the government expects
and will continue to direct defense to contribute
to global security and the reinforcement
of the existing international rules based system,
both near and far.
Which leads to my second point,
the ministry's role in contribute contributing
to New Zealand's response to the changing
strategic environment and the need to have a defense force
that is able to do what is required of it.
Uh, the updated Defense Capability Plan is underway
to create a blueprint for the future of the Defense Force.
This is complex work which will ultimately ensure the
Defense Force personnel have the assets
and equipment they need
to deliver the government's defense objectives
and priorities over the next 15 years.
And because we sweat our assets
and hold them long, let's say over the next 40 years, um,
so we have to get the defense capability plan
process and outcomes.
Right. My final thoughts move to how we purchase
and deliver the equipment that flows
that will flow from the DCP
and committee members will be well aware
that defense capabilities take time to procure
and often need to be able to operate in risky environments
for long periods of time.
Therefore, it is critical to ensuring the safety
of our personnel and protecting New Zealand security
interests that we plan well and execute that plan carefully
and diligently with almost $6 billion
of capability in delivery last year.
The way the ministry does this
and the systems we use are well tested
and they need to be projects.
The ministry managers are considered to be medium
to high scale and medium to high risk,
and can often require multiple payments
and multiple foreign currencies around the world.
A good example is the replacement of the Hercules fleet
through the US foreign military sales process.
And from the announcement in 2020
that the government would purchase five new C one 30 js in a
$1.5 billion project through to today
when we have four new aircraft in use.
And now this very day undertaking critical tasks
with the five to be the fifth to be delivered soon.
And just last week I signed a contract
with a Spanish manufacturer for 60 new trucks
for the New Zealand Army a hundred, a $100 million projects,
which begins the replacement of the versatile
and frequently deployed operational vehicle utility fleet.
And closer to home, the New Zealand company,
starboard Marine Intelligence,
is delivering a cloud-based platform, which provides a range
of government agencies a real time picture of
what is happening in our extensive maritime domain.
This is only a $14.6 million project,
but responds to the need
as outlined in the maritime security strategy for continued
and improved maritime domain awareness
as an essential element for the security
and prosperity of New Zealand.
I use these examples to demonstrate two things
or three things, long, often, long lead times,
often very large amounts of money on complex transactions.
And actually, I take no credit for this, it falls
to my predecessor on time and to budget
and to specification each of those three projects.
And there are others that can fall into the same category.
So I'm very happy to take questions from the committee, uh,
at the conclusion of CD remarks,
and thank you for your time today.
Excellent. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair members, um, thank you for allowing me to address you,
uh, briefly today as well.
Uh, the Defense Force continues to deliver
for all New Zealanders.
Despite the various challenges we face, the loss of one
of our ships, fortunately without loss of life,
cuts off a period when financial constraints combined with
a steadily worsening geostrategic situation that need
to replace much of our aging capabilities
and infrastructure and attrition.
High, high attrition,
which has hollowed out the defense force.
As always, the Defense Force's mission is to protect
and promote New Zealand's interests in the
contemporary security environment.
The woman and men of the New Zealand Defense Force are
pivotal, pivotal to New Zealand's defense
and security interests.
Our sailors, our soldiers, our a aviators
and our defense personnel go above
and beyond for their country
and continue to deliver despite the holders faced.
Delivering on our mission requires a force that is prepared
for combat and ready
and able to protect the country against external threats
and safeguard our sovereign interests anywhere in the world.
And to go into harm's way.
When asked, we are facing a global security environment
characterized by increased strategic competition,
global unrest, and the effects of climate change.
The international rules-based system is critical
to New Zealand's security and and prosperity,
but is under threat this year.
The NZDF has been very active in terms of our operations
and deployment of our capabilities.
New Zealand has been a longstanding contributor
to the Middle East missions where conflict is escalating.
And today we are in Europe training Ukrainian forces
as they combat the most egregious attack on the rules-based
system by Russia.
They've had our P eight Poseidon aircraft
and H-M-N-Z-S URA in the East China Sea on multiple
occasions, enforcing
and monitoring UN sanctions against North Korea.
And we've conducted our first ship transit
of the Taiwan Strait in many years in company
with his Majesties Australian ship Sydney,
and have been active in interacting
with other nations in the South China Sea.
Hm. ZHM NZ
has returned to New Zealand after five months at sea
and will be re-roll
to undertake operations resupplying Antarctica this summer.
The P eight Poseidon are doing exactly
what we intended when we bought them all
around the Indo-Pacific, working seamlessly
with our partners and multinational operations.
The new C one 30 J Hercules fleet has been getting straight
into their role providing central support.
For example, transporting our personnel and material up
and back from Samoa
and conducting ice flights in the Antarctic program.
Two flights last week, two flights this week.
Um, just out of interest, uh,
this year we've got an extremely high number
of Antarctic support flights.
Um, the, today we have two p eights airborne,
one doing a resource fisheries patrol in the Southern Ocean,
uh, one doing the same in the southwest Pacific.
We have, uh, an A 1 0 9 helicopter supporting the
ministry of Primary industries off the coast of New Zealand.
We have the 7, 5 7, uh, flying, uh, the Minister
of Foreign Affairs to New Caledonia this afternoon.
And, uh, yesterday our NH nineties pulled, uh, trampers
who were in trouble off the Tara.
Just back to the 7, 5 7,
the aircraft has conducted 213 flights with only three,
uh, technical interruptions to tasks including the, uh,
subject, um, flight with the Prime Minister that I discussed
with you, uh, back in June.
Finally, I want to make brief statements about HMNZ Nui.
And as you know, the ship grounded on the 5th of October
and sunk the following morning.
I can only commend the commitment, camaraderie,
and courage of ship's company as they worked to ensure each
of their mates and the passengers on board got safely off
the ship expeditiously into seas
that were far from benign at night.
And in difficult conditions, we have engaged contractors
to extract the ship's fuel and other potential pollutants.
And this work will get underway
once the barge arrives from New Zealand in Samoa, uh, on
or around the 10th or 11th of December, depending on sea
and weather conditions, there will be a, a,
a brief setup time after the barge arrives,
and then the extraction of fuel will begin,
which on the current timetable will be around 16 December.
We're advised by the salvage company that the process
to extract the fuel and other potential pollutants will take
around 20 days from then.
However, we have to be mindful that external influences such
as bad weather or other complicating
factors may impact this timing.
It's very important for me to emphasize
that it is our intent to get the fuel
and other pollutants off the vessel as soon as possible,
and we are working to that.
As for what happens to the wreck itself, uh,
that is still work in progress.
So thank you and I'll now join the secretary
and taking your questions. Excellent. Thank you both
For those introductions. Uh, we'll start with
The honorable penny. He,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
And as per agenda, I'll um,
direct this question at you.
Um, Mr. Barton, our Secretary of Defense, uh,
it's good to see you again.
My question is around the procurement.
You talked about, uh, how,
and I acknowledge the Roche report, uh, from the past, uh,
and how the teams work hard on procurement.
My question to you is, given that, uh, there seems to be,
from what I can read in the annual report, a delay in the,
uh, in some of the procurement processes that have, uh,
procurement, uh, of equipment that have already started, uh,
as you said, acknowledging it takes a long period of time.
Um, my question to you is, are you satisfied, uh,
that you'll, uh, be able to explain exactly why if,
uh, those have why and if those have been delayed?
Uh, and the second one, um, uh, Mr.
Barrington is around, uh, whether
or not in the past four months, you've had to make
hard decisions about prioritizing a number
of those procurements in favor of others.
Uh, thank the minister, the member for his question.
Um, the Ministry
of Defense has said in successive annual reports
that against the triangle of specifications schedule
and price, we've privilege specifications
and we privilege price.
And sometimes that is at the expense of schedule.
And that in to some extent reflects the fact that,
uh, in order to not exceed budgets
and in order to get exactly what the Defense force needs,
we make sometimes a deliberate decision to allow schedule
to shift or to slip.
Having said that, the C one 30 JS were delivered
to specification to budget,
and early the pH poseidon's another billion dollar plus
project were delivered to specification
to price, uh, and early.
Uh, so I do think there's, we in,
in some respects might be being a little hard on ourselves
publicly when we talk about the slippage of schedule.
It does in fact not happen that often.
The second point is it doesn't always happen for reasons.
When it does happen, it's often for reasons
beyond our control
and sometimes for reasons beyond the control
of the supplier.
And I think about the impacts of Covid
and on supply chains, for example, which
affected us in New Zealand, but it also affects those
who manufactured military capabilities and military assets.
Part of the trick here is to have strong relationships
with suppliers so that we actually understand early, um,
when there might be slippage and why,
and how we can work with them to mitigate, uh, that.
So for example, a good example, a good example of
that is the, is the, uh, the simulator, uh, which is
for the P eights I think, which is running late,
but we've used that time to build the infrastructure so
that when it does arrive next year, we are, we are good
to go and to train people in Australia so
that the use of that technology.
Uh, my third,
and I think last point on this is there have been one
or two, uh, instances.
One, I think, um, the member will be well familiar with,
which is high frequency radios with Babcock as a supplier
where the schedule has slipped, um, very materially
by a factor of years.
And that I think brings me to one of the lessons
that we need to learn, uh, in dealing with our suppliers.
And it's not just that we're small
and so we, we don't have that much leverage,
although we have very, very good contracts,
which we enforce.
And it's not just that we, um, have small numbers of,
of, of, um, units coming off production lines,
but it's that suppliers see us as small
and they have an optimism bias
and they tend to think, well, this little country down here
that needs this, it can't be that hard, can it?
And in fact, what some
of them don't realize is when you're a small defense force
sweating your assets a lot, using assets for various, uh,
high utility purposes, um, it sometimes comes
as a much more complex, uh, job for suppliers.
And they realize, and I think part of
what we've learned over the last period is to engage
with suppliers early and ask them, have you clocked just
how complicated this might be for you?
Your systems might not actually be well enough suited
to deliver what the small but quite sophisticated
and high utility market and defense force requires.
So I think that's one of the lessons that's been learned
by us in that context.
Our next question from Tiano to io,
Uh, Kiara, um,
and thank you for those contributions so far, in particular
for that clarification with what's happening with the Mani.
I know that many people both here in in Sam in AltEd
or in samo are kind of wondering what the plan was
and knowing that there is, um,
that it's potentially gonna be the diesel side of it sorted
by the new year, I think is, is great news.
Uh, and I know that this, that type of, that type
of activity is, comes at an economic cost.
And so I was wondering, uh, just based on, uh, an article
that came out on RNZ this morning
around the $360 million operating deficit.
Um, and so what, what's the, I'm not sure if you're familiar
with the article article,
but I was wondering what's the plan to help
to maintain operational effectiveness
and national security given the, the long, the,
the vast range of activities that you have to have to have
to do, uh, and just acknowledging your comments
around having to sweat the assets in ways
that perhaps members
of parliament don't understand or appreciate.
So I was wondering what the plan is there?
I would, yeah, perhaps we hold that into the next session
with NF.
Um, were there any specific defense procurement
related questions?
Uh, well, I could do it to do it
around the defense capability plan, if that's that work.
Okay, sure. So yeah, so there are, um, one
of the main causes of the $260 million cost overruns in,
in those key projects.
Um, and how will those be mitigated in future planning?
Given my, my previous comments around, um, you know,
understanding that you guys are doing a lot of work, um,
but what's the plan to make sure
that you can do these things, uh, on budget
or the plan to get more budget in order
to carry out these activities?
Hmm. Well, I think if I go back to our
elements of our key elements of our procurement approach,
the first is that we negotiate fixed price contracts, uh,
and we have have very good contract advisors
and they are very rigorous contracts,
and we will enforce, uh, damages, uh, if, uh,
our suppliers do not meet their contractual obligations.
So we, we both try
and constrain the op, the, the, the need for cost overruns
or the risk of cost overruns.
We have disciplines around contractors to ensure
that they don't, uh, themselves, uh, overrun
or fail to meet their contractual obligations without there
being a sanction attached to that.
Uh, we also hedge all of our, uh, foreign currency hedge all
of our major projects.
Um, it's a swings and roundabouts.
Sometimes you lose on the swings,
but more often than not, we gain on the roundabouts
and there's some value to be fiscal value
to be had in certainty around foreign exchange.
I, the, the, the third comment I'd make to the member is,
uh, over the, the bitter lesson
that has been learned over many years, which is
to get user requirements, right?
If your starting point is well interrogated, uh,
what exactly does the defense for
the defense force require a capability
or an asset to do without defining what that capability
or asset should be?
What, what, what is it intended to do?
Very precisely and very specifically in a very disciplined
and detailed way to accept, to test
and interrogate that, to then accept that user requirement
and then to ask the question in order to deliver that range
of effects, what are the best capabilities,
what should we buy?
And so getting that,
those user requirements right up correct, precise,
incorrect upfront, uh, is a really important discipline.
And if it gives the member any confidence, uh,
those user requirements
for major project projects in a very formal stepped way go
right to me as the Secretary of Defense
and to the chief of the Defense Force.
And we have to formally attest
and sign off on those user requirements
before any further steps can be taken.
So over the years I was working in this space 15 years
ago, and the level of maturity then compared to
where we are now, it's, it is a, it is a,
it's light years, uh, away.
There is a standard operating procedure, a degree
of robustness and a burn of accountability that exists in
that system from top to toe, which I think, uh,
plus those foreign exchange disciplines plus those
contractual disciplines, which I think should,
in the context of, uh, the defense capability plan,
give this committee and the taxpayer some confidence.
Can you just, um, a little bit more on the,
the starting part of that user, user requirement?
Um, uh, from what, what I heard was, if you get that right,
um, then everything else that flows on from that is,
is, is good.
What, what else is involved, uh, in making sure that you set
that in a way that makes sense so
that all your procurement flows on in a logical way?
This, the Ministry of Defense
or defense wr large runs what's called the
capability management system.
And quite a lot of this, uh, can be found online.
It's a stepped, it is a stepped system whereby you,
you start with a number of building blocks.
So one is user required, well, actually you go back
and it's an investment logic map, for example, what, what,
what is the problem we're trying to solve here?
And then that leads you to a set of user require,
I'm simplifying it, um, for the, in the interest of time,
um, and audience attention.
You then simplify it, uh, with user requirements.
Uh, and then we have interdisciplinary project teams made up
of people in uniform, but also ex civilian experts
who then get together
and come up with, uh, with a range of a long list of options
which are tested against the user requirements to come up.
Then with a short list of options, uh,
which are then interrogated both internally through, uh,
our own, uh, uh, systems, the capability management group
and, and the board that the CDF and I chair.
And then if that is insufficient for your needs,
and it should be, by the way we're talking about billions
and billions of dollars here,
we then have a business better business case process whereby
at key points, decision advice
and as taken to cabinet
and cabinet makes decisions, which then leads
to a further interrogation of the option set until finally,
uh, a preferred capability is chosen and the money is
or is not voted by the government.
So you have these steps in-house
and in terms of cabinet government, all
of which are designed to ensure a robustness of a system.
Okay. Thank you. That was interesting.
Right. Next question, Laura McClure.
Um, thanks Mr. Chair.
So my question was kind
of a subtleness talking about the procurement.
So there was a lot of chat, the last annual review
around the interoperability with Australia plannings
and making sure procurement is in line with that.
Um, to some extent, I understand
that sometimes our needs are different,
however, um, from the annual review it was hard to see
what kind of procurement plans are
sort of in line with that.
Are you able to tell me or give us a progress update as to
where you're at and what thought processes put in, um,
to making sure that we, one, we, um, get things
that are interoperable with our main partner.
And two, I guess thinking about, um, supply chain for parts,
which is probably possibly more from the defense side
of things, once you guys are have that equipment
and we are looking for like, you know, requiring parts,
getting repairs, um, knowing
that sometimes we were getting things from there could
actually be major supply issues, those things.
How are you, um, managing that and procurement base?
Uh, yeah, just jotting this down.
That's okay. I'm sorry. It was
Question. They're all very good
questions in
One, Um, let me go back a step.
We, as the minister suggested in her opening remarks, we, we
with Australia have a shared strategic space.
Yes. Um, that's not just trans Tasman
and in our near neighborhood called the Pacific,
that's in the Indo-Pacific and it's further afield.
Um, unfortunately that the world is, the world is shrinking,
uh, and distance is no longer some, uh, insulator,
which means we look at Australia
and they look at us much more sharply in, in terms
of interoperability.
Mm-hmm. Burden sharing, uh, uh, um,
and it's not just in a sense, um, doctrine.
So it's not just kit, it's the way we go about our business.
So if you put all of that, and there are only ally, um,
so we have, there are a range of reasons why we need
to be working closely with Australia.
And this government has talked about an
integrated Anzac force.
The Prime Minister has talked about the NZDF being a force
multiplier for Australia.
Uh, so if you take the strategic setting
and the domestic political strategic settings together,
we clearly have to work further together, uh, and,
and more intensively.
But that background, let me look backwards for a moment.
The C one 30 J Hercules workforce of the,
of the New Zealand Defense Force Australia has them as well.
Mm-Hmm. The P eight, um, Poseidon aircraft,
the Australians have that as well.
We've just bought Bush, Bush Masters in order to start, um,
renewing our, if I can call it, you know, a range
of vehicles including armored vehicles.
Mm. The Australians have those as well.
So purchases
to date are actually reinforcing in a very strategic way,
uh, that interoperability, uh, to which, uh,
to which I would add that.
And the CDF can say much more about this than I
but New Zealand has proved itself over many years,
very valuable to Australia in lift both maritime lift,
uh, or supply with,
and an air lift with the, with the seven five sevens.
So we are already quite a long way along
that journey towards interoperability.
Mm-Hmm. The defense capability plan about,
which I can say very
and will say very little, uh, has that, uh, objective on
of interoperability in mind.
And so when the plan is put to cabinet and agreed,
and when it is publicly released, you will see that as,
as a, a strong theme in the plan.
All of that said, we are still a sovereign country.
There will be moments when, for reasons of cost
or particular need
or where our level
of sophistication in a particular role is different to that
of Australia, we will have
to think hard about whether we buy the same
or slightly different or very different.
So I do think it's quite clear that the direction
of travel is for all of the reasons you alluded to,
and I have reinforced it is about interoperability,
but I would not want to suggest some kind
of robotic response here.
We still have our own interests, um, uh, and, and,
and we need to pursue those,
but they're interested, we should pursue transparently
with Australia, um,
to the fullest extent possible. Thank you. Would
You like a, uh, view from my perspective?
Sure. Um, it, it, commonality
of Australia, our kit, our tactics, our procedures, uh,
our thinking are really important.
And for over a hundred years, we've been operating
beside Australia Mm-Hmm.
Um, in Europe, in the Pacific. And so it's really important.
And so the, the kit, the capability is a really important
part of that from an interoperability, uh, effect.
We've got, um, our navy, our army,
our Air Force are all working very hard
with Australia at the moment to make sure that, uh,
we are joined up when it comes to operations
and that we can essentially work together with,
uh, with the kit.
A good example is with the Air Force we've just adopted
within its airworthiness sort
of maintenance certification programs, which means that, um,
and practicality for the p eights
and the Hercules, our,
our people can maintain their aircraft.
They've got the same aircraft, they can maintain ours,
we can use their parts if we break
or we need it, they can use ours right down to,
we can even fly their aircraft and fly on them.
And they can do the same with our, so that's,
that's really important from an interoperability
perspective, from, um, supply lines, um, making sure
that we've got common supply lines
and we can borrow each other's spears if things happen right
through to ammunition, um, but also for efficiencies
and economies of scale.
So, so it's, it's a good concept.
If, if Australia is going there
or New Zealand's going there, it's,
you've gotta have a pretty good reason why.
Uh, we wouldn't, uh, do the same
for those reasons I've outlined.
Mm-Hmm. However, um, there are exceptions
and the NH 90 is a good example.
Mm-Hmm. And we, we applied all of those principles
and we both bought the NH 90 at the same time, uh, for, for,
for, for, uh, reasons, um, that are Australian.
They have moved away from the NH
90, and we've stuck with it.
So now some of those, um, cost efficiencies, uh,
similar sharing, some of those things we talked about
before, know we're, we're on our own now with the NH 90
and our European partners.
Uh, and that applies to some other capabilities as well.
So most of the time it's good to do.
Sometimes you start that way and you diverge.
Other times there's really good reasons,
uh, why you might not.
Next question, honor. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, uh, Mr.
Barrington, are you satisfied that with, uh,
the significant shifts in Australian, uh,
capability planning,
that it's taken place over the last 12 months, uh,
and what New Zealand will need to do, uh,
steering away from the DCP,
but what we'll need to do to be interoperable
and a forceful now
and into the future, may you satisfied that the, um,
uh, defense industry, rather albeit small in New Zealand,
is gaining opportunity in the significant shifts in
Australia and vice versa.
If we're able to open up the industries
to allow the opportunity, not just for New Zealand,
but of course for Australia, and what we might do,
Uh, at the moment under close economic relations
or Certa, um, Australian
and New Zealand suppliers are,
are treated equally in each market.
So there is no, uh, difference
between a New Zealand supplier and an Australian supplier.
So in, if an Australian Prime contractor wishes
to use new a New Zealand firm
as a subcontractor, they can do that.
And were we to be in the happy position
of having a prime contractor here, we could do the same.
So there's no legal impediment.
Uh, and in fact, uh, CER is designed to ensure, um, not just
that there's no impediment, it's designed to encourage this,
the, the, the, the, the, um, uh, the integration
that you are, that you are implying.
So that's a, a formal kind
of legislative answer at the moment.
In terms of, uh, contractors, uh, New Zealand firms in the,
in the current capability, um,
set about $119 million goes to New Zealand firms.
Uh, now that frankly, uh, out of $6 billion under,
uh, uh, under our control last year
is not a great ratio.
But the fact that, let's step back and ask ourselves why.
The answer to that is largely because all of our suppliers
or prime contractors are major
international firms.
Um, it's their, their Boeing or their Babcock
or their, you know, that, that they are.
So the, the niche role for New Zealand firms to this point,
has very largely been as subcontractors
or supply line suppliers to, to prime contractors.
And in the, uh, in the tendering process, uh,
we make it crystal clear
to firms there is an expect prime contractors,
there is an expectation
that they will look across the contract and the opportunity
and identify what opportunities there are
for New Zealand business and to be active in pursuing those.
There's an expectation on our part that that should happen
to the extent that it can.
Moreover, the Ministry of Defense will work with primes to
identify where there might be a New Zealand contractor
who could make a contribution
and bring those subcontractors, uh, to, to their attention
and encourage them to work with them.
So we, we play quite an active part in
that, in that process.
Um, perhaps my last point to the member is
New Zealand might not be about scale,
and we can clearly make some contributions, uh,
to prime contractors, as we did,
for example, with the Anzac Frigates.
And we've done, and we can do another,
but we have some smart, small, savvy, innovative companies.
And as defense forces change and grow,
and they start looking more in the digital space,
more in the drone and UAV space, uh, uh,
we've got New Zealand firms, uh, doing exactly
that in world beating ways.
And part of what we are doing,
I don't think I'm giving anything away in the context
of the dcp, is to make sure that we are, you know, we know
who those firms are,
and that as we look to build a defense force out not just 15
years, but beyond, uh, we are really looking
for opportunities for traditional long standing firms
on left of arc, if I can use a military term to small, often
and innovative firms on this side of the spectrum to try
and make sure there's opportunities for, for, for
highly professional, really smart New Zealand business
and suppliers to do their, to make a contribution.
Next question. Tim Costley, thank you.
Just like to ask about a couple of projects.
Firstly, um, maybe for the secretary,
but what's your confidence level with rx?
I'm turning here to Sarah Minson,
who's across these projects,
and I would not want to mislead the committee.
Uh, so if the member doesn't mind
Sure. Thanks. Hello,
everyone. Um, do you say the RX project?
Yes, please. Yeah. So that's the operational, um,
I can't remember exactly, but the
acronym regulatory aviation.
Thank you. Just everybody else is aware it's upgrading the,
um, comms, I was gonna say the COMM systems on, um, a number
of the NCDF aircraft, um, including the NH s Um,
we are very confident that we'll deliver
that within time and budget.
Our main provider is Airbus, is a combination
of Airbus Australia and, um, NATO helicopter industry,
which is a European company, which also provides, um,
support to the, to the European companies
that are upgrading their NH 90 helicopters.
Yeah. So that's phase two is the NH 90
part that you're referring to?
Yes, that's right. We've, there's been a number
of phases in this project.
Um, the NH 90 had a phase one part, which was upgrading, um,
identification systems and the making upgrades
to the regulatory requirements by civil aviation.
That was one B for the NH ninety's. Yes.
Two B um, is up, and two C is upgrading the comms
and the performance based navigation on the NH nineties.
And has anyone else in the world achieved that yet?
Are we picking up something
that is already in use, or are we,
Um, yes. We're
picking up things that are already in use.
So the secure comms upgrades, we are using, um,
standard radios with, um, and which are encrypted
and they're being installed into the radios.
Other people around the world are doing that.
Performance based navigation is,
I'm sorry, are they doing that within NH 90?
Yes. Plugging into that software? Yes.
Same software release?
Yes. We are doing it outside the, um,
European big software release program.
'cause that's massively expensive. Yeah.
So we've worked with the Australian, um, Airbus company
to come up with a, um, a smaller upgrade,
which is what we need.
It's the same sort of upgrade.
It's just not quite as extensive. And
Is that where it talks about using, uh,
effectively redundant components?
Australian no longer leave?
Are we sort of piggybacking off that end of their lifer
Type or that Yes, we've used a couple, we've got a lot
of spare parts for the NH
nineties in general from Australia.
And we were, we successfully, um, received a whole lot
of stuff in relation to the helicopters.
But in terms of the software upgrade, um,
they've got a software test center, which,
uh, we are now using.
So they've, um, sold it to the Airbus Company Australia,
and then Australia, Airbus Australia is using that system
to do our software upgrade.
So that would've, that saved New Zealand a lot of money.
We would've had to pay for a test center
to be completely built if we hadn't had Australia's support.
Like that sounds really smart,
but what you're saying is your confidence level in
delivering that on time is pretty, pretty high as well.
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, very high.
And, and, and are they carry on issues in terms
of warranty if we are moving away from the
European software release?
Um, no,
because we, um, we are contracting with Airbus Australia
and NATO helicopters industry, NHI, which is a European, um,
organization, uh, no, we don't foresee any issues with that.
And, and the second part was, and,
and it might be for you, CDF you mentioned
before, I think referring
to the defense aviation regulations in terms
of enabling crews from, say, in the New Zealand PA
to substitute with its maintenance crew, air crew
with an Australian one.
Uh, I get the theory.
I think we've, we've heard about this coming
for a number of years.
Is it being used in practice?
Have you seen examples that you can sort of talk to
where this has actually worked really well?
Yeah, I mean, we've got, um, crews from P eight
and C one thirties who are flying, uh, others where,
and we've done, this isn't new.
We've done this, uh, for many years just so we've had,
you know, ENH 90 crews go
to the other side of the world and fly in Europe.
We've got, um, helicopter pilots that have been flying
with the, the RF So we've proven it can work.
I think what we're doing is making it easier by having a,
a regulation system that can, uh, certify it, uh,
and make sure that we can do this.
Um, you know, for instance,
you might have a Aussie C one 30 coming back from the
Pacific that flies through, um,
and has a technical issue, um, instead of sending, uh,
Australian technicians over to, to fix it, uh, you know,
let, let house, um, do it under a certifiable, uh, system.
So, um, yeah, I think in practice it's working.
We, it's early days and got a fair way to go on it.
There'll always be complexities with it
that we're gonna try and make it work.
Um, and, and yeah.
Do you think people will actually be willing to make
that decision when it's one
of our Hercules p eights parked up at in Australia
that needs a part or needs someone to work on it?
I hope so. I mean, the, the commonality
between their p eights
and our p eights is, I can't give you the exact percentage,
but I'd take a stab and say it's probably around 90%.
They've got some sovereign boxes on there that yeah.
Um, only they can touch.
And we've got the same on ours,
but, um, the rest of it is straight off the,
straight off the factory line, um,
with a huge degree of commonality.
So
Yeah. I, I just noticed
that like the worthiness authorities
and seaworthiness authorities is almost feels like an
industry that's grown a lot over the last, be
before your time as, as chief in, in all fairness.
But, you know, uh, over the previous sort of five years,
are we seeing the benefit of, of that?
Are we, is it making you more effective?
Is it making you safer or is it just making you, so you're
Talking, you're talking now about our new airworthiness in
relation to the New Zealand Air Force
or, uh, the, um, with partners as well.
Well, as I understand it, the intent is that, um, your
airworthiness authority will be recognized
by other partners, meaning that people
with your New Zealand qualifications can work on
partner platforms or vice versa.
Yeah, I think it's early days in terms
of actually working on each other's aircraft
and, uh, home basis when a visiting aircraft comes through,
you know, let's, let's live it, give that a bit longer
to actually, yeah.
Um, coming into play, we're seeing greater reliability
with 58, so they're not having that chance to be tested and,
and break, you know, we've got mission reliability rates at
95%, which we haven't seen in a long time.
Um, and, and same with the herz, you know,
we've only just got them, let's give it a time
to a chance to bet in.
Those are really the, the two, the two platforms
that we do share in common with, uh, with Australia,
as you know, they don't operate the nation it anymore.
Mm-Hmm. And most of the rest of their fleets are,
um, are different to ours. Thank
You. Alright.
Uh, we'll move into the general MOD issues,
which can include, uh, procurement, um,
if we're still wanting to talk about that.
And next question then from Tiano. Ano,
Uh, Kiana, this was, was gonna be a sub,
but it can be a primary, it was just around the, the,
what you were talking about in terms of interoperability.
Um, and I, I wanted to get a bit more of a sense on that,
and I, I, I think I, I get part of it.
Um, if I've got a Toyota Corolla
and my neighbor's got a Toyota Corolla,
I have got a Toyota Corolla,
my key won't start their car, and I get that.
But if we, if it breaks down,
the mechanic will be able to fix it.
Um, so that makes sense that things, uh, like things, uh,
uh, can be used in other ways to fix things.
But the, the, the other part I'm not clear about is around,
like, say, software, um, updates, uh, where things,
we are starting, starting to share computer systems
that become interoperable.
And you talked a little bit earlier about sovereignty
boxes, which I've never heard of.
Mm-Hmm. So I, I'm curious to know how about that part
around, um, making sure that we remain independent and,
and you did talk about that and sovereign
and those kinds of things when you were getting,
when the sophistication of a lot
of the equipment out there is, um, it's getting
around computer systems sharing software updates, and
before we know ai, uh, what's in place to make sure, uh,
things when we don't want them to be interoperable,
uh, can kick in.
Okay. I can take that if you want.
Uh, so yeah, that's a really good analogy
about the, uh, Toyota.
And that's, that's the basis of, of this.
We are talking, you know, about valves
and simple mechanical systems that can be, um, swapped
between, uh, different aircraft.
The point you make around software is exactly right,
though it gets more challenging when you get into,
um, software systems.
Um, there are thousands of different programs, softwares,
black boxes, electronics on, um, on, uh, on these aircraft.
When I talk about the sovereign boxes, you know,
New Zealand made some slight specification changes
to our C one thirties
and P eights, um, as, as a different to Australia.
So the software that runs those pieces of kit, uh,
won't be interchangeable.
Um, we take software control and, um, safety
and security of all software, particularly
for our military platforms, um, incredibly seriously.
Um, so I, I really, in all practicality,
I don't think you'll see much, um, um, much commonality
between, uh, between
software. All
Right. Our next question.
Any,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Barrington.
Um, we've talked about the ever changing geostrategic
landscape and the challenges with respect to policy
that we'll have to create you
and your, um, ministry will have to have to work
and adapt to, um, uh, and now the inclusion of space.
And you've mentioned the new annual report,
significant part here of space.
Um, and while I think that's exciting
because it is the final frontier, um,
I'll put to you though that with all of those challenges
and the competing fiscal challenges that, um, you, yourself
and NZDF find themselves in, uh, do you,
are you satisfied you will have enough scope for
that work within your current, uh, teams?
Yes. Uh, if I just take a step back,
one of the things that New Zealand has been
very good at doing since 1945 essentially, is
to help reinforce the international rules-based order.
And if you think about the three pillars that
New Zealand is now involved in, in space,
which is the combined space operations,
which we joined in 2015,
very low resort resource, it's a forum.
It doesn't have any operational, uh, character to it.
Then if you think about the joint commercial operations,
which we joined in 23, it's passive monitoring.
So although we are leading, we are the, the,
the Pacific coordinator, uh, along with Australia, Japan,
and, and the Republic of Korea, it's, again,
the resource implications are not that great.
And then thirdly, and most recently, uh,
operation Olympic Defender, which, um,
we announced we join in and we'll join in 2025.
Um, it's really
about the rules based system there
where we are looking particularly hard at the spread
of space debris and trying to stop hostile acts in space.
It's a, it is to an extent, uh,
as I think the minister knows, uh,
and all of government set of interest here, it's not just a,
a defense set of interest.
So MB plays in the space space
and we play in the space space, um, uh, and,
and so far we are able to do that,
making niche contributions, um,
and in particular trying to work with partners to
invest upfront now in reinforcing the rules based system so
that we don't end up with a heavier bill down the track.
Not just us, but other countries.
Um, I don't have to see the f wants to add anything to
That. Um, I'm very
concerned about
what is, uh, happening in space.
A lot of our electric capabilities, uh, rely on that.
Uh, a lot of New Zealand life,
the way we know it depends on our space.
So it's really important that, uh,
we know what's going on up there.
Um, and that, um, those assets that are up there for, um,
commerce for our ways of life, um, are protected
and able to, um, not be interfered with, um, uh,
not to be put at risk at all.
So most of the things the secretaries just talked about are,
um, uh, are aligned with that
and not, I, I sit far more comfortably knowing that, uh,
we are part of cspo, we are part of Olympic Defender, uh,
and doing what we can to make sure we're, we're fully aware
of what is happening in space.
Yeah. Supplementary tiano.
Yeah. Just on, on this, on this, on the space questions.
Um, so what kind of like specific space related budget
or performance measures, uh, uh, have you got?
And, um, how does the ministry intend to evaluate
and report on the effectiveness
of its space policy initiatives?
Because I, I hear what you're saying, and it,
and it's general, but how are you going to lock it in,
in terms of measurements and, and evaluations, um,
and the general direction of this?
'cause It is, it is a, it is a new area
and it's an area of, of, of concern, of concern as well.
Particularly just kind
of dovetailing onto the conversation we were having earlier
around, uh, interoperability.
Um, and the number of, uh,
kind of providers that are big have the ability
to put stuff into space as well.
Making sure that we, uh, retain some sort
of sovereign independence in that space.
I think the member first question
and look longingly at my colleagues in the hope
that someone might know the answer to that better than I do,
if we don't, um, if you don't mind, it's a serious question
and deserves a serious answer.
I'll get back to the member in writing, uh, in short order.
Okay. On that, I appreciate
that there may be some further questions about space related
aspects when we get down to the, uh,
operations of NZDF anyway.
Yeah. Um, so we could potentially look at some
of it there for members.
Uh, are there any other MOD specific questions from members?
Excellent. All right. We'll move on now
to the NZD DF session.
Obviously still welcoming your input as we progress.
I thought people were gonna say I could go now, Mr. Chair.
No such chair.
We're in it together for at least another two
hours. Would you go? So
I going, there we go.
Good. I think it was helpful having the introductory
remarks at the start.
CDF. Um, so we might just jump straight into the readiness
piece, if you're comfortable with that.
Uh, with questions from members, um, on readiness
and then workforce and asset management operations,
and then veterans of affairs.
So we'll start with the honorable penny. He
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and thank you.
Uh, CDF, um, my question to you is, uh, specifically
around international military capability, you'll recall, uh,
at the last scrutiny week back in June,
I talked about the kind of soft skills, if you will,
not necessarily the deployment of assets,
but around the soft skills, which are our appointments, uh,
our, um, NZD face, if you will, around the world.
And there was talk then about, uh, re uh, reorganizing or,
or, or reflecting and perhaps shifting around some
of those pieces around the world.
Can you give us an update on that please?
Sorry, shifting, shifting the
Shifting of our, uh, of our personnel who are appointed
to NZDF, um, uh,
Defense attach, Defense attach around the world.
You might recall in June, I asked a question about,
so I'm referring to soft skills instead of like hard
Military employment. Okay. Alright.
Um, I'll, I'll start by just, um, saying, um,
new Zealanders are known.
New Zealand military is known around the world
for exactly what you said.
We have a, a very, uh, unique ability to connect, uh,
wherever we are and get the most out
of those, uh, relationships.
Um, tra training Ukrainians, um,
at the moment is a really good example of that.
Um, we are hearing
excellent reports coming back from our training teams
that are up there training Ukrainians, uh,
firstly from the Brits who command that training area saying
that our, uh, people are running exercise, which are,
you know, one recent report said it was the best they'd ever
seen in their time, their long time in
the, in the British Army.
Um, I, I visited the training location in the UK myself, uh,
just a few months ago
and watched as some of our very junior Army personnel, uh,
corporals, um, training Ukrainian senior, um,
experienced, uh, Ukrainians who on how
to instruct that weren't necessarily teaching them, uh,
military skills, but the skills of instruction.
And one of the Ukrainians who spoke very good English came
and took me aside and said, can I just say that, um,
that is so impressive seeing a junior New Zealand person
being able to interact like this with, uh,
far more senior experience Ukrainians in a way
that we think we, we've never seen any
other countries being able to do that.
Um, it's just the, the style that, um, the,
the camaraderie, uh, the values
that our people exhibit and their training skills.
So then if you look in, in the Pacific, uh,
the way we interact with all of the Pacific militaries, um,
again, a a very unique, uh, New Zealand way
of doing things, uh, there.
And I think that's a, a unique capability
that we have in our New Zealand defense force,
which is quite often, um, under, um,
underestimated or under recognized.
Just going to your questions now about, um, um, I,
I think you're, you're talking about moving some of our
military diplomatic personnel Correct.
Our representational people overseas, correct. Um, yes.
We have had a number of routine changeovers.
Um, for instance, uh, one of our more senior ones in the uk,
um, Brigadier Lisa Ferris,
has now taken over from Brigadier Jim Bliss up there.
And, um, it's getting about business.
Um, we've just recently also announced, um, changes in, uh,
Washington DC changes in Australia.
And in fact, I would say there's probably three quarters
of those positions are just going through a,
a routine three year changeover at the moment. So, just
So that I'm clear, sorry, sorry.
C, d, f and I apologize. So there wasn't any
complete shift away from, or,
or new placement into, given the geostrategic?
No, we think it's really important to,
to have as broader coverage.
Okay. Uh, as we can.
The only thing is that all that coverage all comes
with a, a cost.
That's right. You know, you need to post people there,
you need to post staff, staff families, you know,
you need to move them back and forth.
So that's always in our mind.
And as we've seen over, you know, decade
after decade, we're constantly reviewing, um,
priorities under a framework, which is, um, uh,
reviewed every few years between the Ministry of Defense
and the NZDF called the International, um,
defense Engagement Strategy.
We're always reviewing the priorities versus
what we can afford to do.
If we had get four more,
we'd have more people in our places.
And occasionally as a resolver that you might see that we,
um, move someone from this location, uh,
to this location over here.
But we haven't, we haven't done that, um, in recent years.
Thank you. Next question, Tim Costley.
Thanks. Um, CDF in your only comments, um,
I think it was, you made reference
to the defense force being followed out.
Uh, I think think was the phrase that you used.
And, and as I look at your readiness, um, section in the,
in the annual report, I guess I'd describe it
as maybe recovering, it's, it's up on last year,
but it's maybe not quite where you'd like to be.
But with the exception of a couple of things,
like I think naval aviation,
it certainly looks like it's improving.
I, I'd just like to ask about readiness
and, and, and personnel.
I wonder if you could just start by giving us an update on,
um, current personnel numbers across the three services and,
and civilian reserves, if you'd like.
Um, okay. Thanks.
Um, so the, the fire attrition
that we've seen over the last couple of years, um,
and record numbers, uh, certainly in my time, which was
as a, a result of not just, um, MIQ
uh, uh, duties.
There was a, there was a lot of factors that trove that, um,
that high attrition from remuneration job markets
outside, um, lack of, uh, deployments
or, um, basically a, a distraction that was caused by covid,
um, meaning that people were joining, uh, and not,
and not being able to do what they actually joined for.
That has all changed significantly.
And now, uh, we're seeing attrition numbers, uh, down well
below pre covid levels.
We, we, if you compare attrition on average,
now we're back at sort of 2017, 2018 levels.
And while attrition come down,
that's not the end of the, the problem.
So with a lot of people that have left, we've, we've got
what you call the hollowness we're seeing, um, which is, um,
across the organization, um, hollowness in areas.
Uh, some are okay, but there are other areas
where we've had, uh, a big exodus of people that have left
that particular branch or trade or skillset
or supervision level, um, in very short supply.
And so that's what we are trying to address now.
And it's gonna take, uh, quite some time to,
uh, to fix that up.
You know, it might be, um, relating to your own experiences,
um, a supervisor on a flight line.
Um, it might be, um, uh, uh, uh, an infant,
someone in the infantry, you know, training on, uh,
marksman, um, skills.
We're seeing low experience levels in some areas
and trying to fix that up.
So, um,
and I, I'll come back in a minute just just to the numbers,
but you talked about the distraction of, of covid.
What, what, can you expand on what I mean by that?
Yeah. Well, um, you know, in the, in the first period,
we had, uh, people that were very keen to get involved to do
as a, always do what they needed to do to, um,
support New Zealand security with this, uh, threat, uh,
that was COVID-19.
Um, so whether it was deploying some
of our experts into other agencies, um, uh,
staffing the MIQ numbers, um, and,
and big numbers, um, um,
or ensuring we could, we were capable of, um,
you know, maintaining our military capabilities,
it did take a big toll on us.
You know, we had some people that did 16, 17 rotations
through some of those IQs.
Um, and some of those duties were, were quite, um, um,
quite challenging actually,
and quite impa impactful on our people.
So we did have a lot of people that, um, enjoyed that.
But we had in the main, a lot of people that wanted
to get back to, um, flying aircraft, sailing ships, uh,
deploying, uh, firing weapons
and operating very complex systems
and being part of the military leadership
and teamwork that we, uh, that we do
not sitting on a stool in a hotel
with a clipboard 24 hours a day, uh, watching, you know,
making sure people even misbehave
and taking, quite frankly, some terrible abuse, uh,
during that time as well.
Yeah. So, so do you have, um, you know,
as you talk about Attri attrition being down and,
and numbers in uniform this year being up,
do you have the latest numbers?
Um, I can delve into my pack,
or I could rely on some of the SMEs I bought with me,
but I'm, I'm looking at overall uniform
and civilian levels I have in front of me at the moment,
and I can tell you that, um,
Yeah, perhaps if we take a, a quick pause there, um,
to allow you to find those numbers.
But in the interim, I'm just mindful, uh, for members
of the committee, we have the opposition veteran
spokesperson here for a short period of time,
and I wonder if members are open to it,
whether we could perhaps move
to the questioning on the veteran section
for the next 10 minutes and then come back
to carry on the readiness debate.
Okay. In that case, I'll probably bring my
expert here and welcome Mr.
Thank you. Mr.
Is the acting, um, head of Veterans Affairs.
Excellent. Thank you. Sure.
Would you like to make any initial comments?
Uh, perhaps just a, a brief introduction
or else we can go straight into questions?
Oh, look, happy to go straight into questions,
understand times.
Yeah. Thanks, prea.
Thank you for your indulgence, uh, mayor, Mr. Chair.
Much appreciate it. Um, just, uh, you heard discussion
before, obviously about, uh, um, uh, um, Gardner's case.
Just wondering, have you got any, I mean, the cost of
that's been born by the department must be stacking,
have you got an idea of the cost, what that's cost to date
for Veterans Affairs?
Um, look, I think if we just take the ACT
and its current form, some contextual remarks.
First, the ACT is very new.
Uh, it was put in place in 2014.
Uh, it was significantly different to its precursor act,
the war pensions at 1954.
So that previous act stood for a long period of time.
Um, and it services a really small population
around 45,000 veterans.
The ACT has not been stress tested up
until this point in time.
Uh, lots of other acts of parliament go
through the legal system and they get tested by the courts.
Um, and those interpretations, you know, form
how they're administered.
This is the first time, uh, this has happened
with this particular act.
Um, uh, the, the decision
that was granted in the, in the, so it's been
to the high court only once.
Um, and with respect that
that decision was particularly interesting decision
that it's not surprising, I think, to either side, um,
that it's going back to the courts
to get the proper legal interpretation that it needs
for the act to function.
So, um, with respect to this particular issue,
it was never just a standard application for a all pension.
It was designed to test the system,
to test the parameters of the act.
Uh, and so we're doing that,
and I actually think that, that
that is actually more respectful for the, for the family
and the process that we're going through.
Um, in terms of the costs, I don't,
I don't have a specific number at this point in time.
We'll have to get back to the committee on that.
Um, but, but it's, it's been to the, to the court once,
and I think it's important that we actually take the time,
um, to get this right,
because the previous act was much more legalistic.
Uh, and that led to pressure, um, for the current act, um,
which puts a binding mechanism on Veterans Affairs in terms
of the decisions that we make.
Um, it's incredibly benevolent.
It's been proven to be incredibly benevolent.
Um, uh, it, it's the same framework
that's used in Australia, by
and large, the repatriation medical authority
statements of principles.
Um, and the research done by professors Pearson Holman, um,
in the late nineties concluded that that only 5%, um,
of the conditions funded could be attributed to service.
In other words, 95% of the claims that Veterans Affairs get
that we approve knowingly, uh, have no causal link service.
And so that benevolence remains, it's,
it's ingrained within the act.
Um, and we approve 75% claims that come to VA
in the first instance.
So I just want to reassure the committee
and reassure veterans that
that benevolent framework is there, um, and,
and it's important that they continue
to provide their claims and will get
the legal process Right.
Moving forward, just
On that, have you done any actuarial work on the
liabilities for Veterans Affairs?
Were due to fail on this at the high court this time.
So, so the, the two very distinct things, the, the,
the appeal is called solely on the matters of law. Um,
I understand that, but,
but should they so manage law go against, or, or with the,
or with the status quo, I might
Say, well, they'll, they'll be work.
So, so that legal process has a separate track, the decision
as it currently stands, um,
as binding on Veterans Affairs.
So there are implications of those decisions.
Those are what the minister, um, talked to.
Um, one of those implications, um, is, is around,
it will take us much longer to process claims for veterans
because we have to consider, um, hypotheses
or conditions that are unscientifically proven, which is
outside of how the department's currently being set up.
So there will be cost implications for us to process those.
In terms of the li the overall liability for the veterans
appropriation, that currently sits at 3 billion,
taking a middling scenario from the impact
that will go to 6 billion.
So, so a 50% increase, um, is, is what we've modeled.
Again, that's just a model.
So percent increase in the whole
Yeah. But that,
but that, that is significant.
Uh, and so we are working through that fiscal implication,
if you like, through the normal public management process.
Next question from Dana Kpa. Thank you.
Um, my question is just around
what improvements have been made to Veterans Affairs ability
to inform, uh, new Zealand's veterans of their entitlements,
um, throughout the past year?
Yeah. Um, so that's, that's a really good one
because we know within the portfolio, um,
for it's been an opt-in model Mm-Hmm.
Um, this year, ally, uh,
the New Zealand Defense Force had moved to supplying us with
information about people when they get their
qualifying operational service.
Um, which means when a uniform personnel
gets qualifying operational service,
they'll get an email noting that,
and at Veterans Affairs, we will register them.
Um, and so they will go in the database.
So it's now changed from being essentially this model
where you have to opt in, the one where you have to opt out.
Okay. Um, uh, the other, that's fantastic.
The other, the other thing that, um, the minister noted was,
um, there's, there's been a huge frustration
with our claims processing times.
Um, yeah. And we've been able
to have a significant reduction in those since, say, for
by around 500.
So we were sitting at just under 300, 3000, uh,
claims within our backlog.
That's now down to around 2,300.
Okay. That kind
of answered my other question too. Thank you. Okay.
Oh, just maybe a supplement.
So with the opt-in opt out, um, uh, you,
are you going back on that?
Is that, uh, how, how far back are you going on that
Spective? Um, so that,
that is prospective from May, 2024.
Um, there are historical data sets that exist.
Um, uh, but,
but a lot of that information around, um,
while the name is accurate, where
that person is currently residing, isn't accurate.
So, so we'll work through that as a matter of course.
But the current system is, is,
is current deployments moving forward?
Supplementary? Yeah.
So, uh, just for for point of clarification for me.
Um, so if you,
if you don't get your qualifying service Yeah.
Um, letter, uh,
or whatever it is, um, does that mean that, um,
you are not considered a veteran?
So for the people who might be in the, in the military, um,
if they don't achieve that level,
so they don't serve in an operation,
are they not then considered a veteran if they leave?
It's, it's avex question, uh,
because the word veteran has a colloquial meaning within the
English language, which is, uh,
basically anyone who's put on a uniform Mm-Hmm.
Um, and we have a, a strategy called,
of which we consider anyone to be a veteran.
Um, that being the case,
if you don't get qualifying operation service
as the ACT stands mm-Hmm.
Um, then you don't have that eligibility for,
for the entitlements, for the entitlements under
that piece of legislation.
But we still recognize them colloquially per
the word as as a veteran.
So, um, but, so if that's the case,
how do you then capture those people in database
or in a system as a veteran,
even if they haven't done operational service?
Uh, is that, is there a way that they are captured?
Because part of the problem in the past has always been
that nobody knew who the veterans were or where they were.
Um, is that part of the system going forward?
Well, that's part of NZ dfs human resource records and,
and data sets that, that they have,
which identifies the population of anyone
who has served in the New Zealand Defense Force.
Um, we are working on, I guess, a subset, those that have,
that are all that, that have qualifying operations service,
and the clients of Veterans Affairs.
Um, we are doing a lot of work with, um,
the statistics New Zealand integrated data infrastructure
to be able to identify those different population cohorts.
Um, and then to be able to look at, um, um,
uh, research questions that might arise in terms
of differences of deployments, um,
educational attainment, those sorts of things.
And, and we published a report with the, what, what,
what is now the Social Investment Agency, um,
earlier this year.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and as part
of our broader cross government strategy,
there's a work program set around research and data.
Thank you. So, um, we'll, just on the veterans red,
there's some work on redefining veterans.
Is that correct? And will civilian staff still don't count
as veterans, even if they did serve in those,
uh, theaters? Um, is that correct?
Uh, no. No.
Um, so, so with respect to the act, um, uh,
coverage is granted if you have been deliberately
put in harm's way.
And so there are members
of the civilian workforce from a Ministry of Defense,
if you like, a policy person.
Um, uh, they will policy practitioner, if they're deployed,
they will receive coverage under the Veteran Support Act.
If someone is seconded
to the New Zealand Defense Force from the G-C-S-B-G-C-S-P
or the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service
respectfully, they will also get coverage,
um, under the act.
So it is slightly broader than just, um,
someone who is in uniform.
Um, the minister has made it a priority, uh,
as previous ministers have to, to look at the definition.
Um, 'cause it is one that, um, that frankly it wrangles, uh,
and, and completely acknowledge that.
Um, and, and that would be something for him
to speak to at this time.
But, but we are giving him active policy. Whats to that?
So, John, sorry, just to step on that, if,
if there is a change made to that definition,
do you have confidence that the data you hold
will enable you to capture any potential new cohort?
Good question. People coming in
so we don't end up in another situation
where we have no idea who
or is out there or how many there are.
Um, Um, we, we are making,
we're making significant steps.
Um, I, I don't want to predicate where the minister goes
with, with that definitional piece.
Um, I, I don't think it's tacked the question
of whether we know, uh, or not.
The, the, the piece
that really wrangles is people join the military
and they almost forego an individual identity,
and they become part of a collective, they become something
that's bigger than themselves, they train together.
Um, and when some get qualifying operational service
and some don't, there is a feeling that
that is materially unfair, um, irrespective of entitlements.
And I, I think that that's the piece of work that
is being targeted by the minister and,
and really veterans affairs to get
that recognition piece right.
Um, outside of the system of entitlements, um,
weekly income compensation
of those material things. Mm-Hmm.
Yeah. I guess I'm just trying to understand if you feel,
if you have confidence that there is sufficient sharing
of information such that irrespective of
where the minister lands the information you have will
enable you to go, well, it's, it's here.
Therefore, these extra 5,000 people are
Employed. We, we, we were
able to, um,
we had an agreed information sharing agreement with,
with 11 agencies pass, uh, legislation last year.
Um, so that, that's put us on the front foot
to not just be able to share information, HR information
with MZDF,
but with the Department of Corrections, ministry
of Education, a CC, or yeah, a CC.
So, um, that, that framework, um, allows us
to be much more joined up across government to use data to,
to better serve, um, the population. Alright.
Sorry, final question, Greg O'Connor.
Um, yes. Just so that, um, qualifying service, it's still
outside New Zealand though, isn't it?
It's still not, um, you can't qualify
for a deployment within New Zealand, is that correct?
Um, the act doesn't restrict whether it is New Zealand
or overseas, it talks about thresholds of risk.
Um, and then there are tools
that the New Zealand Defense Force used to determine whether
that threshold has been reached.
Um, and it is then on the advice of the chief
of the Defense Force to the Minister of Veterans,
not Veterans Affairs, uh, that any declaration
of qualifying operations services
Made and has, sorry, if I may,
has there been a declaration within New Zealand
of, there's late,
There's one coming to me, uh, shortly on Ari White
Island. I
will that be the first,
Um, the first that I'm aware of.
Alright. O to be decided upon. Right? Yeah. That,
That has not reached me yet.
It's, uh, imminent
and then I'll have to go through a process
and provide advice to us to pick.
Okay. For one, two, I realize I've, uh,
luck indulge,
be chocolate just with the, now,
and this is probably a little bit speculation,
but with the change in the employment situation now where,
you know, where we're now, um,
more people now are gonna be out of work, do you anticipate
that that may end up with more now seeking you out,
um, who currently don't appear on your lists?
Um, any, any indication that's happening already?
I, I don't, I don't think it's the prevailing, uh,
labor market conditions.
Um, uh, in terms of what is driving claims
to Veterans Affairs.
Um, we, we do see an uptick in, um,
uh, mental health related conditions being, uh, coming from,
from service overseas.
Um, and that, that has driven an uptake in weekly income
compensation, uh, for, for people who, who,
who can't participate within the labor market.
But, um, I, I wouldn't expect just a simple
economic change in the labor market to drive
a path for our plan
Process.
Excellent. Thank You. Thank you. And again,
Thank you.
Is that the last question on about veterans?
Uh, if you had a comment on
it, just be able to make a point.
Um, can I, can I just please, um, thank the committee
for your questions and your, um, uh, around,
around our veterans and ensuring that they're being looked
after those that serve in military duties
and go into harm's way
to protect the interests of our country.
And I, I recognize your questions,
acknowledge 'em from last time and this time,
and I think, uh, our veterans and New Zealanders
and those serve would be very hard to know that you are, um,
taking such an interest in these matters.
So thank you. Okay. We,
We will move back now to The, uh,
Questions on readiness, which is urging to an extent
that the workforce piece, uh, with the leniency
of the committee, will probably merge those two together
and sit so far as it enables effective question.
Uh, Tim Costley, if you'd like to carry on,
I believe you questioning around attrition notes.
Thank you. And CDF if it helps, I've got them out
of your annual report
Here, But if you've got the numbers,
If you have, so I've got the overall, uh, numbers, um,
and, and I've got the current uniform number.
Oh, yes. Um, um, CPO, uh, Jacinda Fennell will be able
to, um, individual service numbers.
That's what you're after. But, you know, I'll just
make a general statement.
We, we reached a peak of 9,771
uniform people, um, just after Covid had started.
That was in 2021. Yeah.
We saw a decline,
and I'm answering this in the context
of your early questions about, um, the impact of Covid.
Yeah, yeah, thank you. We saw a decline there down
to 8,489 by the middle
of 23, and the uniform numbers now
are starting to climb back up.
We have, we have ups
and downs depending on when recruit courses we're graduating
and intakes are coming in,
but currently we're sitting at 8,741.
If I can, I can just broadly say,
and I'm, I may be about to be corrected,
but generally the Army is sitting at 4,200, uh,
regular force currently.
Um, the, uh, Navy is around 21, um, uh,
30, and the Air Force is at 23, uh, 58.
Thank you. And, and certainly the numbers and those,
and as you reported, show that growth that you've
of over the last, last year.
How, how do the civilian numbers compare?
So how would your number of civilians compare to,
say your number of sailors?
Okay, so if we go back to 2012, uh,
we had 2,550, uh, civilians, um,
that has shown periods of growth and decline over the years.
And, and I'm looking, over the last 12 years, we've seen,
um, five peaks.
We saw a, um, a peak just as COVID started and a reduction,
and then we saw an increase, um, as we started to lose,
um, uniforms out of the defense force.
There was an uplift in civilian, uh, recruiting to,
to basically cover the jobs that were being left vacant by,
um, by our, our uniformed members.
And that reached a peak of 3,200
and, uh, 37, um, earlier this year.
But that is now, um, that is now reduced
as we've taken measures to, uh, to slow down recruitment
of civilians, um,
that has now dropped in's currently sitting at 31.
So that's still about a thousand higher than the
number of sailors you've got.
Yes. Is there, I mean,
do you have any reflection on that?
Like if I think there are more civilians than there are
sailors, more than there are aviators
when we think about the nature
of the work you're undertaking
and who can do that, how, I just welcome any reflection
From that. Yeah, I, I hear
your observations.
I think, um, you heard the minister's
comments earlier about making sure, um,
we've got the right people in the defense force in the right
places of the right skillsets, uh, to be able
to discharge our, uh,
new New Zealand security interests and do, and do the job.
Um, so, uh, I think as,
as we are able to grow our uniform numbers, um,
keeping the whole persec, um, cost
of our people in perspective, um,
and with the way global security, regional security
and New Zealand security interests are going, uh, it is my,
uh, intention to grow the uniform numbers, uh, as much
as we can within, within our, uh, cost limitations.
Now, that might mean that we have to offset, um, civilian,
uh, staff, uh, in the process of doing that,
but we need people that can deploy, um,
and, um, you know, operate military equipment, um,
in New Zealand or overseas.
Yeah. And, and my, and my last one, and, and,
and the reason I ask this
and that it is really reading
that small workforce workforces,
because ultimately, as you say, you've got outputs.
And when we look at those readiness numbers
that are starting to recover and,
and certainly tracking the right way, um, I, I hear
what you're saying is that, you know, from what you've said,
you need people in uniform to conduct operations.
It's the operations that you're saying have been one of the,
uh, determinants in, in curbing the attrition effect.
Seeing, I mean, I noticed
naval attrition has halved in the last year from 16.7 now
to 8.3, um, and that's helping you to rebuild those numbers,
but I guess you need that critical mass as you grow it
so you can get more ships to see.
So there are more operations which ties more people to stay.
Yeah. That transition of people into
uniforms gonna be really important. Yeah,
It's a delicate balance,
but, um, we, we've got a defense force
that is gonna be busier with operations than at any time in,
in my serving, uh, memory.
That is the state of the, um,
the environment we're facing in the, in the future.
We need people who can, um, who can deploy
and can go basically into combat, into harm's way,
and that as a uniform people, I just wanna be clear though,
we, we do have a, a strong requirement
for civilians in the defense force.
Sure. Civilians bring, um, technical skills, um,
that we don't train our uniform people for.
Um, we have different, um, context where it makes sense
to employ a civilian, a civilian in those jobs
and not a uniform person, uh, in that, uh, in that position.
So we, there, there is an optimum number
of civilians we need.
We're still yet to refine that and work that out,
but civilians are very important to our organization.
And so, and I hear that,
and it's certainly not a criticism of civilians.
It's like you say, it's about that balance,
but when you look at that readiness
and you just said this is gonna be the busiest environment
that you've been in, what's the, what's the number one focus
for you in terms of preparing for that?
Or what's the best lever you can pull?
Um, so, uh, from a funding perspective,
um, we need to make sure that with, with the funding
situation we've got at the moment, we can balance operations
versus, um, versus recruiting.
We don't, we're not having too many problems, um,
having people line up at the recruiting centers.
Uh, we, there are more
people applying than there are job vacancies we have
from a uniform perspective.
So that's not a problem if you were,
if you were thinking about that.
Um, the problem at the moment is having the funding
to grow the uniform strength, uh, back to
where it needs to be at the moment.
Okay. Sorry, supplementary tiano to be
Yeah. Kiara, just sort
of tracking back to the question that I,
I I asked around, uh, that article within RNZ around
the projected 360 million operating deficit
and just acknowledging your comments
around the constraints within, within, uh,
with the constraints that you have now
with this looming deficit, what's the plan to make sure
that you maintain operational effectiveness and,
and of course, the, the work, uh, around national security?
For as long as I can, uh, recall we've been facing, um,
operating pressures.
There is never enough money. Uh, defense is not alone.
Um, all agencies around New Zealand are under the same,
um, the same constraints.
Um, now I'll just have to say the, um, the leaking of
that figure was not intended.
Um, we were talking to a, um, select group
of people within the headquarters
to brief them on what's going on with our workforce program
as we've promised, we are trying to be very transparent
with them, keep them updated and informed.
And so that, that number, I don't know how it's got out
and I have not, uh, seen the article in depth.
Um, so I don't know what it said about the, uh, 360, uh,
figure, but I just wanna say, um, the, the,
the cost of fuel, ammunition, maintenance, uh,
travel, all of the things we need, we need to do
as a military has increased an incredible rate since Covid,
since U Ukraine was invaded by Russia, uh,
since attacks on the Red Sea have interfered with shipping.
Um, and you know, a number of other factors,
those costs have gone up way more than, um, than uh,
consumer price index, uh, in New Zealand.
That's really putting a lot of pressure on us.
Um, there's not a day goes by
where I'm not sitting there having to juggle and manage
and decide, do we do this activity
or do we do do this activity,
but every dollar we get, I have to work out, I have
to make sure I'm spending that on the right things.
And for me at the moment, that is our, that is operations,
that is making sure our aircraft are in the air safely.
That is, and, and doing valuable missions for New Zealand.
It's making sure our ships are at sea, doing their missions,
that making sure that our, our soldiers in the army are, uh,
on the range firing
and ready to deploy overseas to any one of our eight
or nine deployments at the moment.
Um, that means that given there was,
that we are under a significant cross.
S there's a lot of things we can't afford to,
um, to do at the moment.
Things that any other,
any other time when we went under such a significant amount
of funding pressure would be good and proper to do,
but we just need to put those on pause for now or stop 'em.
And so those are daily decisions for me.
And the executive team,
$360 million is the figure we're looking at at the moment
now, um, you know, is
that gonna result in output failure for us?
No. And I go back to the comments I used before.
Um, where are we not at the moment.
There, there, there is, there is not a, um,
we have fail, not failed.
Oh, we have not failed to, to deploy
or do an operation that, um, that we've been asked to do.
Um, that the, the issue really is it takes us longer
to prepare to do those missions and those deployments,
and we might not be able to send the same number of people,
um, that we have previously, um, sent or for as long.
Um, the other, the other pressures that come into that 360,
there's training, there's travel, there's conferences,
there's relationship buildings with our overseas partners.
Um, there's a whole raft of things that we have to force
or turn off to make sure that we can keep, um,
keep our flying, sailing, shooting and deploying out.
And, and just on that, just, uh, one
of those priorities I was wondering on, uh, just,
and this is moving to the work, uh, workplace part is
around the essential services, uh, such as, you know,
housing and health support for, for per, for personnel.
Uh, where, where does that fit within,
within these priorities?
Sort of noting the comments that we've all made
around concerns around nutrition, uh,
whether they're civilian or, or uni or uniformed.
Uh, uh, you, you know, if, if housing's not an issue,
if health support is, is not an issue, then uh,
then retention becomes, uh, easier.
So I I I'm wondering about the pro the priorities, uh,
in terms of that space.
Yeah. Housing. Um, yeah, housing is an issue.
There's, there's not enough
of the right houses in the right places
up to the right standards.
We're, we're fully compliant with the Healthy Homes Act.
We spend a lot of time and effort, uh, doing that.
Um, but some of those houses are still pretty old.
Um, housing's very important for the Defense Force.
We're a mobile organization.
We have, we have to move our sailors, soldiers
and aviators, um, and their families around.
Um, we don't have, we have to move in between bases.
It's just the sheer nature
of the way we train and work and prepare.
We don't have everything on one base.
Now, you imagine families that, um, have
to pick up the, the whanau reschool,
the kids new spousal employment and do that every two
or three years, three or four years.
Um, that, that, that is why defense housing is I important
for our people.
We are working on it. It is under significant pressure.
Uh, we are doing what we can.
I do have, do have specific questions around the number
of houses in different locations, um,
and the standards of them.
I do have someone I can bring to the table
to answer those questions directly.
We can come onto that during the asset management. Okay.
Piece, uh, supplementary from Penny in today.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, supplementary to the line of questioning Muslim costly,
um, how many of those who have left the workforce, uh, uh,
left the, the uniformed, um, service
have gone to be a reservist?
Uh, I can't give you the, um, the exec number on that,
but I'm sure we can, we can find it either
forth worth or get back to you later on.
Yeah. I think one, one other point too for me
to make just in terms of, um, context
of our previous discussion is we, we have got people
that are actually coming back to the organization as well.
That's right. Reenlisting. Yeah. That number too.
Yeah, that's where I was going.
That's, that's, that's a sign.
Um, that's a sign of the times. Yeah. Because you
Talk about, and the reports do
as well about the hollowing out.
Yeah. And my assumption is
that they've stepped out Oh, yeah.
Because of the time. But there is an opportunity
to bridge them back in Yeah.
To help with that hollowing out
Of Yep.
That, and that's a really good thing.
And we, our doors are wide open to those
that are suitable to come back.
Um, they are already preloaded with skills leadership,
teamwork, um, professional knowledge deployment experience,
and that's a huge saving.
But it's a huge, goes a huge way to filling those,
those hollowness areas where we're missing experience.
It doesn't mean the doors are open for everyone
to come back in all locations,
but certainly those areas where we,
we were absolutely really short.
Now we welcome them back and we're seeing it.
I don't have the exact number of
No, that's fine. You can come back with
That.
That's fine. Yes. Just to confirm, it'd be good
to get the number of people that have exited regular force,
but gone on to reserve force
and also then the number that are reenlisting, RF two.
Yes. Okay. We'll take part of that. Get back to you. Okay.
Are we up to operational respect?
It's well, Yes, yes, yes. Absolutely. Can I
Go with that one now, please?
Thank you. Um, uh, my, uh,
my question is about operation respect.
Oh, yeah. Um, uh,
and I ask this every time you come, so you'll be,
it'll be no surprise to you.
Uh, but, um, it, the annual report says that phase one, uh,
focuses on embedding operation respect into core business.
And the conversation we had last time was, uh,
in the last review a year ago, was that
that probably hadn't been a priority.
Um, so I have a few questions.
Um, what has been done to date, uh,
and what priority has been given to this work?
Uh, so, um, thank, thank you for the question.
Um, the Chief People Officer,
um, uh, so operation to speak over the last year,
what we have done is really, um, tempted to put
that onto a really solid foundation.
That was the primary feedback we got from the office
of the Auditor General and the report that they tabled in,
um, uh, March 23,
may, April, may 23.
Um, and so
what we have done is we have stood up a team,
a permanent team, um, small but but
nonetheless, um, fully dedicated to, uh,
and we've, we've resourced that team to be able to, um,
uh, visit, visit all of our allocations around, uh,
New Zealand so that they can work with, um,
with local units
because it's clear that that's where we need to, um,
to get in and make a difference.
What we've also done is, um, built a strategy
and the strategy is focused around, um,
creating high performing teams that trust each other
and can be operationally effective.
Uh, and that's strategy has, um, phases of work
sitting underneath it.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, and we en we envisage it being a 20
year work program.
So we are not, um, we're not being rose tinted about
how long this change will take.
Mm-Hmm. Um, this take long time.
This will take, this will take time.
Um, but what I can say is that, um,
the team is now out visiting all our cancer bases.
They've had a fantastic response, um,
particularly from the leadership, uh, at those cancer bases.
Uh, and the next step is now to work
with the local leadership to build plans
that suit the circumstances of those specific cancer bases.
Um, we are also putting in place, um, monitoring
and data collection so
that we can know if we are making a difference.
I think that's been one of the issues in the past in Sydney.
That was something that was raised by the auditor general.
Uh, so, uh, we also have just had, um,
the auditor general, um, in reviewing our new strategy,
reviewing our work program.
Uh, and they are in the process of finalizing, um,
a report now.
Um, but we've, we've had good feedback
and I'm feeling, um, very confident that we've got it now.
Very robust, um, foundational place. Mm-Hmm.
That's, thank you. Um, thank you for that.
I mean, I'm interested on, on an ongoing basis
We'll be interested in, in
Progress, I'm sure, but can I ask you, um,
CD if your commitment to it
and how you, how you, uh, I guess in your day to day
approach, a bit of mice, the Operation respect mantra?
Yeah, absolutely. Uh, and, and my messaging is very clear.
Um, we, we will not stop pushing
and, uh, growing, developing, implementing this program
until every case of, uh, discrimination, uh,
appropriate sexual behaviors for bullying, uh, stops.
Um, it's very concerning to me
that instances are still occurring.
Mm-Hmm mm-Hmm. Um, it is, it is, um, encouraging
to me that the culture has changed, whereby people can now,
uh, feel a lot more comfortable.
Three are coming forward to report instances,
and that the process we have in place to investigate, um,
either a, um, an open ended investigation
or a, um, a more confidential, um, investigation is, is,
is seen that, but again, I, I am, um,
we are not stopping this until we have made, um,
made significant progress.
It's frustrating to me that it's gonna take 20, 20 years.
Um, you know, I was on this journey.
I was part of the startup of opera respect in 2016 mm-Hmm.
When I was the chief of Air Force.
After the, after the, um, the report.
We had, uh, reports
and the, uh, uh, the Roper inquiry.
Um, so I was on that journey at the start,
and I thought we'd be done in a few years.
That's now, you know, eight years later,
and we've got our site set on 20 years,
but culture, culture can change, takes time.
We've got a new leadership team that was selected, uh,
by the minister and myself, uh, earlier this year.
Mm-Hmm. Um, their commitment
to our respect was a key feature of, of their selection.
So, um, full commitment across the new tier,
tier one, tier two leadership.
That's good to hear. Thank you. Uh,
Supplemental question from the honor board to Anton.
Thank you. This is also an area
that I'm very interested in,
and I acknowledge too that it takes time for
that culture change, particularly in the big organization
as you have going over several different areas.
It's also in other sectors being
where it's been most at threat when there has been, um,
because of the time it takes when there have been funding
cuts or having savings having to be made.
What assurances can you give
that this work won't fall backwards or off the radar
because savings are having to be made?
Um, I can give you assurances about our commitment,
but I can't give you assurances about the level of funding.
Like all of our programs we have, we have a number
of programs, not just stop respect,
but it might be climate change, it might be, um, you know,
there, there's many of them that are, um,
always subject to, to funding
and may end up having to be, uh, rationed.
Um, so I can't give you assurances.
There won't be, um, cuts to this or any of those programs.
Mm-Hmm. But, uh, our commitment, uh, is there,
and at the moment we have made major steps within the last
12 months to, uh, to offer respect in terms
of people and resource.
I, I totally acknowledge that.
I just think we would love to know that women are going
to be in completely valued by the commitment
to resourcing as well.
Yep. So resourcing comes in all
shapes and forms, as you know.
And, um, it's the financial piece, um, I'm talking about.
But our, our resolve, our people we have assigned
to this program, our learnings, embracing audits
and, um, any recommendations, whether it's other agencies
around New Zealand who are on the same journey as US,
international militaries that work, you know,
funding will not affect that.
Mm. Funding does affect the number
of people we can throw at us.
And, you know, we, we have to be mindful of that.
Completely honesty. Is that something you've
Always had to be mindful of?
Has that changed from your time as VCDF?
Have you always been resource
constrained, or have you just had,
Uh, yeah, look, we, we could throw 50
people at this if we wanted to.
You know, we had an uplift last year of, uh, 11.
Um, you know, where, where do you stop? Um, that's my point.
Yeah, gotcha. What, what, what cost is, is, is right.
Um, and we have to make sure that we are being very careful
with every dollar, including what respect
and that it's going to,
things are gonna make the biggest differences.
Thank you. Alright, we'll move now
to the Defense Estate Asset Management section.
You'd like to start us off honor.
Uh, thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, this is about, uh,
I'm trying to be a little careful here.
So, um, but
because we've raised the matter of the mani, uh,
in the asset management space, um,
the, the timing was a little bit odd with respect to the,
um, uh, the interim operational release of the mani.
And are you able to shed some light on the timing of the,
um, uh, of the interim operational release into the full,
I'm assuming the full operational release of
for activity and deployment?
Um, y yes,
but I, I would say firstly, you know, we have, um,
fronted up here and said that, um, operation, we,
at this stage of the inquiry,
human factors are the primary course of that accident.
I think, um, it, in getting into second phase
of the, um, of the court of inquiry,
which will take a lot longer, we've said, what happened?
We now need to go into why, um, having said
that human factors or a series
of human factors was the primary cause, um,
or look at sort of what led
to those human factors occurring.
Um, whether we rule out any other things like mechanical,
um, you know, we're pretty,
pretty comfortable there at the moment,
but let's, uh, just to be on safe ground, we have to let
that inquiry run its course
before we can make any, any judgements like that.
But my, my instinct at the moment is that, um, um,
you know, release of readiness, um,
of the ship we're talking about,
its initial release into service.
Mm-Hmm. No, I don't, um, at, at this point in my thinking,
it's, um, it's not t fact.
Yeah. No, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I accept, um, I'm trying to steer away from the inquiries,
so I appreciate it still going through that process.
Um, so with respect to, uh,
and it was, um, mentioned, um, about the Babcock, um,
arrangements that we have with them,
and if we consider the entire fleet, uh, how we, um,
suite our fleet.
Um, my question is specifically about our naval fleet.
We know what's happened with Nui.
We know what our timeframes are on, uh, the,
um, uh, the frigates.
Uh, and so the maritime piece was a part of a piece of work
that's been tracking over the past 12 months.
Are you able to give us an update on
that particular, uh, piece?
Um, uh, yes. Okay.
Um, so just looking at the, uh, frigates, um,
with the upgrade, uh, now successfully completed,
and, um, our ships have been put through their paces, um,
for the, for the first major operation deployment
where we'll see H
and NZS to Carhart deployed
to the Middle East on maritime security
mission early in the new year.
Um, you know,
we are leading what's called the Combined Task Force 1 5 0,
which is focused on interdicting, uh, particularly drugs,
uh, across the Indian Ocean in that region, which help fund,
um, uh, other activities, uh, in the region nefariously.
So, um, we have a command team going over there,
but we also have the, the frat that will be put
through its spaces while it's, uh, doing that, uh,
it will be involved in port visits
to many countries on the way up and the way back.
And we're hoping that we'll be able to interact with, um,
other significant exercises in the area, uh,
including potentially the, uh, UK carrier strike group, uh,
two early days in the planning add.
Um, and Aliman s the major Australian, uh, exercise.
So that's the frigates, both frigates, uh,
they are getting very aged at the moment,
and it's, well, we've just upgraded the
mission systems on them.
Um, their ability to, uh, to go into combat.
Uh, the actual shifts themselves are still, uh, decades old
and, uh, nearing the end of their, of their life,
their economic, economic life.
So there is a separate program that we're embarking on
to make sure we can eke out, um, as much life out of those
to pro prolong their replacement, uh, as, as best we can.
We, you won't see 60 years of life out of them,
like we get out of our, our Hercules or our, our P threes.
But, um, certainly we, we hope to get them into the, um,
into the early to mid, uh, thirties.
Um, the, the re the rest of the fleet, um,
with the exception of HNZ, um, needs replacement,
um, in the next, within the next 10 years.
And that's a significant, uh, capital, uh, cost.
And we haven't seen anything like this in terms of a, um,
replacing almost our entire maritime capability
and one, have, we've never had this situation, uh, before.
So it is something we have to, uh, proceed,
um, very carefully with.
Uh, and the defense capability plan will help
shape and inform that.
Um, with the high attrition that we saw in the, um,
over the last few years, um, uh,
that did result in us having to put two of our, um, opv our,
um, offshore patrol vessels, uh, into what we call care
and custody, uh, where, uh, we did not have the crews to,
to sail those and operate those.
So they are still in operational care and custody.
And you heard the minister refer to the fact
that we are looking at potentially plugging the gap, uh,
with one of those OP vs.
We'll have to grow the Navy significantly in terms of people
before we're able to, um, to bring that,
that other op OPV back out if indeed we do it all.
And that's all tied up with the, uh,
defense capability plan decisions as well.
And then we get to, um, h
and NZS Canterbury, the, the, you know, the, one
of the workhorses of our defense force, uh,
which provides incredible amount of value, uh,
around New Zealand, um, and in the Pacific.
And there isn't, um, a humanitarian
or disaster relief event that has occurred in the, um,
since we've had Canterbury
that hasn't involved Canterbury playing a, a key role.
Um, uh, that ship is aging as well.
Uh, the problem, uh, really with Canterbury is though
that we only have one, and she can't be in all places at
once, and from time to time, she has
to go under maintenance as well.
Uh, which means, uh, something else has
to take those duties on as the duty ship, uh,
particularly over the high risk weather season
that we're about to go into.
Um, Canterbury is aging
and like all of our aging equipment needs, um, more
and more maintenance all the time.
So what we've seen, if I just relate it to the yes,
the air piece at the moment, those, those aircraft
that we have replaced, um, every,
every time we replace an aging aircraft for the new one,
it's the Poseidon or the C one thirties
or the NH nineties, um, or our Texan training aircraft.
Um, you get a, a massive uplift in availability,
mission assurance and usefulness and, and,
and some efficiencies as well.
Um, and it's, and the same goes for our maritime fleets.
If I could add to that, Mr.
Chair, uh, one of the characteristics
of the defense capitals blend over the last, I don't know,
30 years plus probably has been the deferral
of expensive assets
because they can't be met in this year's budget.
That's across all
administrations, and it's across many decades.
But I think it's our shared hope that
we'll get a good robust DCP that can be
owned in a kind of bipartisan way, so
that we don't have this lumpiness of capital spend
and deferment, but rather, there is a plan that is honored
so that we don't have this great capital cliff
that we, that, that we tend to face every five
or 10, 10 years.
And this, it's the fleet now, it was P eight
and C one thirties, um, in a, in a former administration.
And I just think it does not serve small
democracies well when we have this amount of,
of, of lumpiness.
So I think that's one of our shared hopes, uh,
that when we do it, when the plan is completed, um,
it'll be seen for, for what it is a quality product and,
and success for administrations can just stick to it.
It sounds like you're suggesting quite a lump.
Well, it will be quite a lump in nearly the entire fleet.
And, and picking up on your point, you know, you, it's easy
to defer some of those decisions.
We were expecting a decision
to purchase a Southern Ocean Patrol vessel in
2021 that didn't happen.
So interested in whether
or not you see value in that still being part of
potential future capability investment.
Well, I don't, I, look, I can't go there,
but what I would say is, um, uh,
the DCP will propose a, a plan which has got high utility
for the environment in which we find ourselves now in the
environment that we foresee.
Um, but actually in many respects,
the essential point is robbing Peter
to pay Paul robbing time in one year simply causes a, a,
a train wreck of a problem further down the track.
So we just have to get out of that bad habit, I think. But,
But what we're hearing from CDF as well is, like
with the protective fleet, that's not a new issue.
I think we've disposed of two IPVs as well.
Attrition and critical trade shortages mean
that it's not just having the platform, it's having
that people to go with
You. You quite
tell you it's a system.
You have a platform, you need personnel,
you need operating money.
Uh, it's all of a piece.
Um, and the DCP is trying to bring all of these things
into one space.
It's not just about the purchase of capital assets,
it's about the estate, it's about infrastructure, it's about
personnel, and it's about operating,
uh, op opex.
So there's no point doing a DCP
and expecting it to endure if you don't bring all
of those things together,
Need a strong economy to fund it.
Uh, next question. Laura McClure.
Um, thank you Mr. Here.
With that in mind, um, are you able to explain
to the committee currently how, um,
depreciation on defense assets work
and how is it affecting your ability to maintain,
upgrade these assets?
I've best bring my depreciation, uh, expert in for this
and, and, uh, give Bridget, uh, mark,
who's our Chief financial Officer, a chance
to speak about the, the art of depreciation.
Good afternoon. Uh, so, uh, as we depreciate
our, um, approximately $10 million worth of assets
that funding can be used, uh,
to reinvest in new military assets.
Uh, and, and what we've done, um,
as a defense force is use those that those depreciations
to invest in our, uh, C one thirties
and our p eights.
And so we are now in a position where, uh,
we are effectively spending
our appreciation reserves each year.
Mm-Hmm. So, uh, in regards to future investments,
we require capital injections.
Okay.
Is, um, on that is the way in which, um,
we handle our depreciation similar to other defense forces,
like the likes of Australia, the states, for example.
So New Zealand is unique Mm-Hmm.
In terms of its public finance act. Mm-Hmm.
And, uh, we are one of the only nations, uh, that,
uh, use, uh, depreciation reserves to purchase Mm-Hmm.
Uh, new, new assets.
So in other countries like, uh, Australia, uh,
the asset purchases are will from capital injections.
So it's something you need
to the New Zealand Public Finance.
So currently you're obviously not using it
for any maintenance, your depreciation of this
Point, Other than which you just explained.
Okay. Thank you,
Tiano. To your honor,
Uh, Kiara, this goes back to my question around, um,
housing stock, um, sort of, uh, uh, just wanted
to know about the condition of the housing stock
and what plans are there in place to improve it.
I, I got a letter from the manawa two tenant Union
and also heard from people around, other people around here
around the concerns of the accommodation, uh, for,
uh, for personnel.
And for me, probably like many of us, we either have whanau
that are in, or were in, in, in the services.
So you want them to have a nice fady, uh,
particularly if they've got tamari, uh,
making sure they've got healthy homes is important.
So I was wondering what the plan is to improve, uh, both,
you know, both the barracks
and accommodation, uh, right across.
Thank you. Thank you for the question.
And if it's okay, I might, um, allow our head
of defense state and infrastructure, um, Mr.
Mark Brunton to, um, to speak to them one,
Uh, um,
and thank you for the question, uh, the members
of the question and for the care, uh, around, uh, um,
so the good news is the housing program, uh, regeneration,
uh, has, has commenced.
And, uh, we have a number of different, uh, elements to
that, that have, uh, that have begun.
If you'd like, I can just run you
through a few of those elements, Mr. Chair. Yeah, that'd
Be good. Um,
The, uh, the, the, the first, um,
and probably the closest to, um, commencing is, uh, at
where we we're, um, uh, have now, um, engaged with a, um,
preferred supplier to build 50 homes.
And that is a, uh, a treaty settlement arrangement
that we're doing with the local iwi as well.
And we're just now currently negotiating the final parts
of the lease back to, um, to the iwi.
We're hopeful to get that underway in the New year
construction underway, uh, those 50 new homes with part of
that program is also some pilots at, um, uh,
other locations are around the, uh, defense state.
Um, but I, I, I think to the question is
that we have currently 1800 hundreds, 1900 homes actually.
And, um, the program, the program as it stands,
is only touching, you know, a very small part of that.
The program looks to redistribute
and reduce the number of homes that we have.
We have too many, but we've got, um,
too many in some places, not enough in others.
So the program will look to redistribute, um, the, uh,
the housing stock.
We are also, um, the government
provided funding, um, this year for some
of the housing in Auckland at deport
that we're losing to, to Iwi.
And, uh, we have been engaging local, um, lease ranges.
We've got 61 units in, um, Northco that we've, uh,
recently taken up, and we're currently in the final
negotiations with, uh, uh, for some, um,
leasing housing in their, um,
subdivision up in deport as well.
Um, so that's, that's currently where it's at as CDFC.
All our current stock is Healthy Homes compliant.
Um, but it is old
and, um, it is not, I guess, modern living standard as far
as layout, et cetera.
So we've got a long way to go, but we, we have commenced
and, um, it is now we're looking forward to the DCP
and what we might be able to, uh, grow the housing program.
Um, we have all the designs,
we have all the program in place.
Um, we just now need to, um, work through the, the, uh,
the implementation of it.
H how, how about Linton and oia?
Are those on the radar or,
Uh, so part of the pilot, um, some
of the homes will be at Linton and oia, um,
and they are then in future t tranches of, um,
of, of renewal.
H how far in the future?
Uh, it'll, it's dependent on the DCP.
Okay. Well, thank you.
Subline three pd. Uh, thank you very much. That's
E exciting stuff. In
particular, the iwi stuff I recall, um, uh,
back in my tenure was one of those exciting opportunities.
Just out of curiosity, does that include scope
or did, has that planning included scope
for the infrastructure that supports those housing,
for example, childcare centers?
Mm. It, it does include, um,
it does include supporting infrastructure.
Um, the, did you say, did you say childcare?
Yeah, I use childcare centers as a,
That's general, Do, if I recall correctly and has
Correct, correct.
It is generally included as part of the,
the base facilities.
Um, so no, not specifically in, in that first tranche,
but certainly in, in most of our housing areas,
there are 12 here, kindergarten facilities, et cetera,
that are, are, are amongst the precinct.
Um, so, uh,
but no, the, um, the housing at Haki will have new road in
new, um, horizontal infrastructure, um,
and all the latest fiber, et cetera, um,
to support families.
I had a supplementary on that, how much of
that construction will be done using offsite manufacturing?
Uh, can't really say
that's commercial confidence at the moment,
but as the preferred supplier will be building on site, um,
there were a number of, uh, we had actually 13 people
that bid, um, for the, uh, for the, um, for the 50 homes.
And some, uh, most of those actually were offsite Mm-Hmm.
But the onsite, um, uh, was the preferred in competition.
Okay. Other questions in relation
to asset management or defensive state? Yep.
Um, can you give us an update?
Um, the last 12 months, the, uh, ongoing development of the,
uh, infrastructure at oia, uh, not the housing, um,
but the fuels supply report quickly.
Sure. Um, so that was part of
what we called the AHA infrastructure program.
You, you, you, you recall that.
And, um, we've advanced about halfway through what
that program was initially envisaged to, um, deliver.
Um, that included a whole range of airfield upgrades to, um,
to, uh, accommodate the new P eights, uh,
heavy landing weights and, uh, et cetera.
Um, include some security upgrades, um, state
of the art doc center, for instance.
Um, but the largest pro, um, project, as you've indicated,
is the new fuel precinct, which is now well underway
and is on track, um, on, on time and on budget,
and is scheduled to be opened in February, uh, in,
um, December of next year.
Um, large facility over the far side of the airfield.
Um, and, uh, we will provide a, um, a much,
much needed uplift in fuel capacity
and safety, um, of delivering fuel.
I'm excited about the investment in moha care,
but closer to my home in, um, has, uh,
I know there's been a lot of work over the past
12 months in particular.
I've happened to drive out those ways a few times.
Um, is, is there any, can you give us any updates?
I know there were a number of challenges.
Uh, for example, can the infrastructure there fully support
the new Hercules as there be further investment
and development there with respect to that
At F Bay at funeral Park?
Uh, yes, there has, um, some of it has been
through the actual, um, C line 30 project itself.
Um, as far as a new SIM facility, um,
there has been a significant project in upgrading all
of the tarmac, um, at, uh, um, which is due
to be open, um, very shortly.
Um, and there are some hangar upgrades as well
to accommodate, um,
new security requirements, um, et cetera.
Um, so not to the extent it of, um, at Akia,
but, um, a reasonable, uh, level of investment.
Can I just make a a, an observation?
Um, new, new platforms,
new aircraft doesn't always mean, uh, new infrastructure
and hanger hangers to go with it.
Uh, with the, with the P eight, it did,
and it was a good opportunity because we were moving
that capability from to high.
Um, a good example of us with the, uh, the C one 30, um,
the, um, those aircraft will go into, uh, more
or less existing, um, uh, hangers
and, uh, working accommodation, um, uh,
without significant upgrades.
And, and the reason I'm making this point is that, um,
you know, we have to be very careful with the costs
of all our capabilities
and having minimum viable capability is very much a, um,
realism as we're trying to make sure we get
as many projects through as possible.
Um, you know, the, the state
of the working accommodation at, at 40 squadron
and nearby at the home of the, of the, uh, the aircraft, uh,
it is, it's pretty old.
Um, but it's still functional.
And so I'm just, just saying, you know, in some cases you,
you do need to build new infrastructure, others, um,
it will suffice for a couple more years yet at least.
Sorry. Um, I asked last time at the scrutiny week about,
uh, the Woodburn, um, the housing
and the estate that was considered for treaty settlement.
Um, and I wondered if, if there,
if there's an update specifically on that particular matter.
Uh, at the time it was sort of, it's a treaty thing.
I I appreciate that,
but the asset itself actually sits, uh,
with the Air Force.
It's okay if it don't. Yes. Yeah.
Okay. So the, the elements
of the treaty settlement have now been declined by the iwi.
Oh, okay. And they have settled, um, separately
with the government, um, on that. Uh, that's all,
That's fine. Thank you.
Yeah. I wonder, um, Cindy, if you give
Us an update on the Naval helicopter force,
I think we'd previously heard that there was a possibility
of a royal naval flights, um, coming out here,
there may be some challenges with, uh, the,
the current fleet, how long
that the sea price could operate for. We do think that,
Okay, so generally, um, the, the track on a couple
of years ago with the, the Sea Sprite, um,
you know, it was starting to run out of, run out of life.
It was very difficult to get spares, the cost
of maintaining it gone up significantly.
And we were looking at other initiatives, um,
including working with the Royal Navy
to see what we can do there.
We ex we took that, the exploration of that potential, uh,
that possibility to, uh, right through to the point where,
um, for quite a few reasons on both sides, um,
it didn't make sense to progress that
at the same time we pushed very hard to see
what innovative ways we could use using, you know,
local industry to EA bit more life out of the, um,
out of the cease brights.
So that has paid off to a certain extent,
and we are getting improved availability out of the, um, out
of the cease brights, um, now compared to
where it was a couple of years ago.
The other thing is we've taken some cprs off offline
and declared a lesser number in order to use those, um,
those now aircraft as a source of potential spare parts.
Um, when it comes to the DCP, the, the question
of the replacement of that, of that, of that capability,
uh, is one of the first, uh, big decisions that'll need
to be made in terms of chronological sequence of the dcp,
But you've got life in the Sprite to get
to that next sort of,
There is more life in the Sprite, very challenging.
Reliability is always a, a factor.
Um, and,
but, you know, we're endeavoring
to get helicopters on the back of our ships, uh, when
and where they need to be there.
Right. Very good. All right.
We'll move now into the operations section, section E Uh,
we have 20 minutes set down for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, and look,
and once again, an acknowledgement of, uh, the vast amount
of operations that you are involved in in the past 12
months, uh, it has been the operation, uh,
of deployment to the Red Sea.
I wonder if you can give us an updates, uh,
on as far as you can. Of
Course. Okay. So,
um, the deployment to the Red Sea, uh,
has been quite successful from our perspective.
Um, I know the, uh, partners that we, uh, are deployed
with there, um, very much valuing
and recognizing the skills of our people.
Our people that are, that are there on deployment are
finding utilization
and development of their skills there, um, is, um,
is very rewarding.
Um, but to me, the bigger, um,
issue is the whole reason we are there.
And that is, um, around, uh, protecting the freedom
of commercial shipping in the Red Sea.
It is around safety of life at sea of those, um,
commercial crews and,
and military vessels that navigate those waters.
And is it about, it's about upholding, um,
rules in particular Unclos
and the international rules based system,
and we feel we have made a valuable
contribution, um, to that.
Um, the, the Red Sea deployments are involved with, um,
targeting, um, hhy, uh, attempts,
uh, to target commercial, uh, phishing
and, um, our crews, uh, without saying too much, uh, working
with intelligence, working with legal procedures,
and working with command decisions over there
to actually take out, um, h the, uh,
capabilities that are in the process of
or about to aim at commercial shipping.
And so that deployment will come to its conclusion, um,
in January, uh, that was the, uh, cabinet decision.
And so our, our six people
will come home at the end of January.
Anything else? Secretary? Good.
Um, on, uh, the other deployment,
another significant deployment, which you mentioned Ukraine,
uh, our people training Ukraine soldiers,
which is excellent.
Um, but given the shift over the past,
or at least in conversation by the likes of Zelensky about
Pathways to Peace, um, uh, is has, when, when,
when is the, has it been reviewed, uh,
that particular deployment been reviewed in the last 12
months with a view towards what that means in the coming 12
Months? Uh, yes. Yes.
As far as it can, yes.
We're always, always reviewing, um, the Ukraine, all
of our deployments, but in particular, this one to A,
make sure it's what the Ukrainians need and want,
and b, that it suits us, um,
and those other departments we are looking at.
So one of the recent evolutions,
or the changes that deployment's gone through
is from training their infantry.
Uh, we're now getting, um, taking on more
of the training their trainers so they can train themselves
to be self-sufficient.
And Right. You know, over the last nearly three years now
since, uh, Russia's a legal invasion of Ukraine, our,
our commitment to Ukraine
and our involvement in that has changed.
You know, right at the start,
you will recall we sent Hercules up.
We had, uh, logistics teams, um, in all parts
of Europe helping to flow, um, resources
and equipment to the right places.
Um, you know, we've made, um, uh, donations,
um, uh, there's, you know, there's, there's about
that we've given surplus equipment to Ukraine.
We've looked at things like the LEDs
and whether they have any utility there.
Um, so it's always changing.
I think just going to your point about the future of, uh,
Ukraine, you know, we, we, from an NZDF perspective, uh,
we are fully committed to doing what we can
and to making sure that it's tailored to provide the best,
um, the best value, uh, to help Ukraine.
You think if this conflict comes to an end at some point,
um, I'm sure there will be other, um, opportunities for NZDF
to be involved as well, whether it's in reconstruction
training, medical support, law of armed conflict, um, just
as in, in the Middle East as well.
There's, there's always, uh, very rewarding, uh,
and valuable ways we can actually contribute.
Sorry. Yep. Supplementary Tiana
Ana?
Yes. Kda. Um, thank you for those comments.
I was just reflecting on what you were saying
around the Red Sea, uh,
and given, um, you know, the,
the call from the ICC, uh, for the arrest
of Benjamin Netanyahu
and support for that, uh, right across lots
of different countries, uh,
and how hand in glove the Americans are with Israel,
what kind of processes are in place
to make sure there is enough diplomatic distance, uh,
between us and that
I, um, I can't really go into that.
All I can say is that, um,
we are there for very clear reasons.
We have been from the beginning
and, um, from a, from a CDF perspective,
I'll stick to my knitting on that.
Um, we went there to do three things,
and we're doing those, uh, very well.
I, I think if I could, uh, just add one of the tests
that is applied to New Zealand Foreign Policy
and defense operations is the company we keep,
we take comfort from the company we keep,
and in under Prosperity Guardian,
there are countries like Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands,
Norway, Singapore,
and Greece, who are also, uh, uh,
providing commitments in that space.
And I'm not trying to be romantic here,
but I do think that that gives you some greater degree
of comfort that, uh, these are, uh, small, like-minded,
um, democracies
that take their role in international law very seriously,
uh, and also have views on what's happening in the Middle
East, more what widely,
and yet they, like us, are continuing their commitment
to Prosperity Guardian.
So I just think it's sometimes useful
to look at these things from an angle, uh,
at when we are looking for, for assurance,
and I think the company we are keeping
provides some assurance.
Thank you for that, Tim Costley. Yeah.
Um, uh, Marshall, you've given us, uh,
massive comments earlier about the operational tempo.
It's increased, it's, it's gonna keep increasing.
Uh, in your annual report, there's, there's quite a,
a decent section on Solomon Islands assist you,
you got at least two ships in Indo-Pacific Maritime
Engagement in the Southwest Pacific, um, uh,
Pacific Relief NPNG assisting people out of,
uh, new Caledonia.
Remembering that the period that this covers,
I wonder if you can give us any sort
of operational highlights from the, from the year
and review in particular.
Uh, and, and yeah, to start with,
do you have just any overarching comments on
that operational tempo or achievements?
Yep. I mean, I, I think there is a lot going on this year.
Uh, we tend to focus on the cost pressures.
Uh, my job is to focus on the doing
and making sure we can do as much as possible with the,
with the, uh, funding we have.
Um, I think, uh, coming out of a period of covid, it's been,
uh, very refreshing and rewarding for the NZF to get out
and, um, get our missions going in the air and get to see
and get our points going again.
Um, and so I think our,
our people are really finding a renewed sense of purpose,
um, and focus on that.
And that's one of the most rewarding, uh, factors to me.
Um, we're also making sure that our new capabilities, um,
that have come through the new capability management system,
uh, put to best use as soon as possible, getting best bang
for buck out of 'em, and that includes C one 30 J where,
you know, it's, it's, it did two ice flights last week.
It, uh, it's doing two flights this week.
Um, that is a, getting it ready for those ice flights,
which are, um, from my perspective, the most risky
and some of the com more complex missions we can do.
Getting that new capability down there so quickly, um,
is a testament to that, why we buy that sort of capability
and why we have that airworthiness system in behind it
that we, uh, that we talked about.
Um, we've done it quicker than the original, um,
her did back in 1965.
And so that, you know, that proves that our systems
are, uh, actually working.
I, I'm, I'm really concerned about the external security
environment, um, and what's happening, I, um, as a CDF, um,
and I've been in for four decades now.
Um, I haven't seen the world
or the region in this kind of state,
and that concerns me as a CDF
because at some point, you know, we need to be prepared
to make decisions, which could see our sailors, soldiers,
and aviators going into harm's way
to protect our, our interests.
Uh, that worries me and it should, um,
and making sure we are prepared
and ready for that, um, is, is, is, you know,
that is three quarters of my day and night every night.
Um, so, um, that is very concerning.
The strategic competition
that we are seeing, uh, in the region.
Um, climate change, um, affecting us in
so many ways, um,
and the constant challenging internationally on
that international rules based system,
and a violation of those rules on the other side
of the world is a violation of the rules
that are apply to us here as well.
And countries like New Zealand Thrive, you know, we,
we rely on those rules for our peace.
So yes, I, I, um, I, the,
the other piece to me is a selection
of a new leadership team who are very much focused, um,
along the same lines, making sure that our people are ready
and capable and prepared to, um, pick up their capabilities,
their equipment, um,
employ their leadership teamwork skills, and to go
and, um, look after New Zealand's interests.
And that, that's very rewarding to me.
And, and so what is it
that's enabled you over the last year to lift
that operational tempo in a, in a challenging environment?
Um, I think
the, um, the, the realization that, uh,
the world is changing, the, the temperature is going up
in terms of the challenges that the world and our region
and the Indo-Pacific is, uh, facing.
Uh, it's, it's given us a lot more focus.
I think, you know, talk about the, the Covid era
where we're very much focused on, on, um, a different kind
of threat to New Zealand, um, and our prosperity.
Um, but, um, things are going downhill, um,
quite quickly from my, from my perspective.
And I think everyone in the New Zealand Defense force sees
that, um, our senior politicians, particularly our minister,
um, see the fact that, um, New Zealand needs
to be more joined up with our partners
and our ally than ever before.
Um, we see them paying particular attention to capabilities
and posture, um, and things like defense funding.
And I think that's, um, a big wake up call to, um, to all
of us, and particularly for me
and the rest of the people in the New Zealand Defense Force.
Can, can I just ask you about that, that,
that last point about our, our one former Ally Australia
and I guess our closest partners, we think
of naturally things like Five Eyes with the us, with the uk,
um, and we,
and we've seen some commentary about
how closely we should be partnering with them.
What should, like, should we still be
partnering with countries like,
Sorry, did you say our former Ally Australia? Uh,
No. Our, our formal,
our our one formal ally,
but also our, traditionally our, some
of our closest partners like the US and the uk.
Yeah. Can we, can we go without them?
Um, so we, we work in a, in terms of collective, uh,
security, we always have with Australia,
we always have in this, this region we are part of,
we are part of the system that looks
after security in the, um, in the Indo-Pacific.
You know, we can't expect New Zealand, uh, to have a,
a broad, wide, deep defense force that have every
single capability going, uh, um,
and that we, um, can take care of ourselves.
In all regards, we, our system works on the fact
that we need to, um, work in close concert
with our Ally Australia
and make, you know, that means that we don't have
to have every capability that they have,
but what we do, we do have, they need to rely on,
and we need to be, we need to have a certain level
of assurance in that and make sure we deliver on that.
And that's what we're trying to do at the moment.
We offer huge value, um, with recent capability, uh,
acquisitions that we've made, things like the P eight, um,
and surveying what's going on in the region.
Um, and we're seeing a huge increase in, um,
other nations coming into the region.
Um, you know, I'll, I'll say just recently we had, uh,
China's most capable, uh, warship, their, um,
the re high cruiser, which is their most sophisticated, uh,
warship they have in their fleet, um, with a destroyer,
also very capable, and some other, another support vessel.
And Vanuatu, just recently, uh, they've had a, um,
a destroyer down in Tonga, uh, for the Tongan
50th fleet anniversary, um,
where most other countries said something more modest,
you know, they sent a destroyer, uh,
and we've seen a, a, a far greater presence by China, uh,
in the Pacific, in the southwest Pacific.
Not to mention a, um,
intercontinental ballistic missile test, which, um,
you know, flew across the Pacific
and splashed down, uh, not far off the EZ of, um,
French Polynesia and, um, which, uh, China calls routine.
Um, you know, incidentally, we had, uh, one
of our p eights on the scene to, um, to look at that, um,
and, uh, you know, um,
and able to sort of share our observations about
what was going on there, uh, with Australia.
So that means they don't have
to do that, we can do that for them.
So they have expectations on us to, to do
that, and we live up to those. So
What's your reaction when I think of something like
our intelligence collaboration and work a, a and
or orus Pillar two was part of that.
Um, and you know,
I appreciate you might not wanna comment on
comments from the leader of the opposition on the weekend,
but you did have a, a former, a recently former Minister
of Defense saying it's a no brainer to walk away from orus
and partnering with those sort of countries.
What, what would be your reaction to that?
I, I'll, I'll, I won't comment on those.
Um, I thought you respect the secretary might wanna, um,
think about that, but, um, you know, if,
if you're asking about Orcus pillar two, um,
we are doing our research, we are getting our, um,
building our knowledge, um,
and, um, making sure we, um, uh, in a position
to help the government make decisions on, um, or pillar two.
Those that are in, or pillar two have been very
helpful in assisting us.
Um, but there's a long way to go on that.
I'd just say a few things.
If I can draw some of these strands together.
Um, I am in no doubt that New Zealand's strategic
position is sharply deteriorating.
Um, that's not focused solely on New Zealand.
Of course, it's a regional and global phenomenon. Mm-Hmm.
Uh, the rules based order postwar liberal rules based
order is under challenge.
Uh, you just need to look at at Ukraine,
but there are other examples.
Um, hotspots are becoming a good deal hotter,
and a number of those hotspots are in our own hemisphere.
Uh, the, uh, the, uh, global commons,
uh, throwing up very deep
and difficult existential challenges relating to
artificial intelligence or climate change
and security issues.
Uh, and we are increasingly seeing the securitization
of the Pacific by, um, countries who are not of the Pacific.
So our, our strategic position has deteriorated, um,
on the issue of Five Eyes
and Partners, I simply say a couple of things about that.
Uh, this government has clearly articulated a
foreign policy reset.
They talk about Five Eyes Partners,
and they also talk about like-minded traditional partners.
And I think that second leg
of the double should not be lost sight of.
So this is not just a story about the United States
or the United Kingdom or Canada
or Australia, it's also the Nordics, it's Germany,
it's Japan, it's Republic of Korea.
These are countries that we have worked with
share common values
and systems of government with four decades.
And I think the government is simply underscoring, uh,
what has been quite a long trend
at a little bit of risk.
Um, I'm struck that you've raised it, uh, Mr.
Costly about some of the, um, uh, public commentary
around New Zealand being in strategic alignment
with the United States.
That's, um, was raised in a briefing that my own
ministry instructed, um, that was the first sentence
of a very short two sentence paragraph.
The second sentence has got lost sight
of the second sentence read.
We share us concerns about the challenges
to the international rules based order,
including in our region.
If you take those two sentences together,
it was a strategic alignment around the importance
of standing together in support of the rules-based order.
I think to take one sentence without seeing the other in
what was quite clearly adjoined paragraph is, um, is,
is is a little unhelpful, and I think it
therefore, uh, it draw, you'd be drawing rather a long bow
to suggest that some have that, um, that notion of
strategic alignment in that particular context
is a drastic revision of foreign affairs and defense policy.
I do not see that.
I think a, a fair reading of that paragraph would be
to join both of those sentences together
on orus Pillar two.
Um, we are following an Orthodox public policy process.
Advice has yet to be given to the government.
Uh, the Minister of Foreign Affairs has said
that New Zealand will undertake a careful,
deliberate exploration of what engaging
with Orcus Pillar two would mean
for New Zealand in strategic and economic terms.
That is a perfectly Orthodox public policy position to take,
and the Minister of Defense has added only going
to be joining up if we can see a point in it
for New Zealand, if we can add something credible,
if the cost is not debilitating,
and if it's in New Zealand's best interest.
Again, I think that those are useful criteria.
We as officials have yet to bring all
of the evidence together, all
of our exchanges together in one place,
and provide considered
and balanced advice to the government of the day.
I, I simply say to those who have views about Orca, I
and I accept there are a range of views for our part.
We are simply following Orthodox public policy,
and we will take the time it takes to get that right
and we will furnish the government with robust and,
and well interrogated advice.
Perhaps. My last observation on orus pillar two is you do
not join Orca Pillar two, you agree
to collaborate on a specific issue under the rubric
of Orca.
Pillar two just seems to me that in some respects, perhaps,
um, we, we are getting a little ahead of ourselves on this
and it deep breaths would be, um, you know,
is, is what we are doing.
We're just perfect, going to provide good
public policy advice.
I do not talk about the politics that is not my business.
I simply reassure the committee that our part, we are being
orthodox in our approach to it.
Appreciate that. Yeah, I appreciate that.
And c, DF, sorry, I'm just No, no, you go please.
C, D, F in terms of the comments you were making in regards
to the earlier line of questioning.
Uh, and you'd also commented a couple
of times earlier in this hearing today around your concern
for the increasing uncertainty tensions we are seeing
globally, but more close to home in our Pacific region.
Uh, and that to you worried constantly about the need
to put New Zealand defense personnel in harm's way.
I'm interested in your assessment as a percentage
of likelihood as chief of defense force of needing
to deploy New Zealanders into a conflict environment in the
Pacific within the next three years.
I, I all due respect, I, I couldn't give you a, um,
a, a percentage on that.
I would just simply reflect on the fact that, um, over, um,
more than a hundred years now, um,
New Zealand has not shied away from our responsibilities to,
um, protect the freedoms of New Zealanders
and other like-minded nations around the,
the region or around the world.
And, um, I'm sure we will be pulled on again at some point
the way things are tracking to have to step up.
I hope it does not come to that,
or, um, all discussions with my, uh,
international counterparts.
We talk about trying to do everything we can to avoid that.
Uh, but it's, you have to be ready, uh, to do that.
It, it, um, it goes with the job
and that's why you have a defense force
to protect our interests in many ways.
But some of those involve combat,
and that is my job is
to make sure you have false siters ready as possible
and capable of doing that with our partners. Yeah,
I understand that. But obviously
in the context
of the growing uncertainty we're seeing,
we heard from the minister as well as well
around the geopolitical tension increasing then.
Is it your view that there is no different change to
that likelihood now from what it was five years ago?
Um, I would say we are closer today than
we were five years ago.
Things have changed significantly.
The invasion of Ukraine, the Middle East, um, uh, situation,
uh, which happens every 11
or 12 years, um, the, um, strategic competition,
um, in our region is increasing.
Uh, these things are not improving, uh,
with each passing year or month for that matter.
I think all I would say is never underestimate the ability
of the human being to step further towards the brink
or by surprise away from it.
Um, we seem to have an unearthing ability to do both
and catch us sometimes by surprise.
But I do think the overarching strategic environment in
which we find ourselves as deteriorated
and we, we have to take that seriously.
Mm-Hmm. Well, that's right.
And in the context of New Zealand, that it strikes me
that there are many issues facing New Zealanders
and everyday life, health, education law
and order the economy more generally.
Uh, foreign affairs defense issues generally have not rated
highly on that because we are so isolated geographically.
Most countries are friendly.
But it's my sense that it's changing
and I'm interested you, uh,
gauge on whether New Zealanders should be paying more
attention to this issue
and whether there is a genuine increase in risk
within our home region
Absolutely. Now than
there has been in
Just recent years.
Um, as part of the, uh, defense policy review,
I think it was probably just over 18 months ago, we did a
brunton call, uh, survey, um, of, uh,
I think just under 10,000 New Zealanders who, um, like never
before, um, reflected that they were concerned about the
international environment.
Um, they were concerned about the shape of defense
and defense's readiness to step up
to the mark when called upon to do so, if called upon.
Um, and I think there is, um,
you know, just my interactions with various members
of the public, um, I'm ccra facing increasing questions
around, um, concerns around the external environment.
You know, I travel internationally to meet with counterparts
and attend meetings where we, um, we, uh, focus on,
uh, shared views and concerns of the world.
Um, but I can tell you that, you know, most
of the other countries I go
to are significantly more advanced than they're thinking
about the state of things than, uh,
than we are in New Zealand.
And I think that's probably just a, a factor that for,
for many years we've, we've lived
with an international rules-based system that is able
to offer us protection because of our distance.
But you know, those protections in this modern age, um,
you know, are quickly disappearing.
And I think New Zealanders are waking up, don't they?
It took before as well around your aim to grow the numbers
in our regular force.
Um, can you give us some insight on
what that number will be?
And by when we have a view
On what people we need to give, uh, the DCP will, um,
you know, where decisions are made about that.
And that's, um, and that's released, you know, we'll be able
to, um, share more of that, um, with you.
I think part of it though is to make sure we have a, um,
a recruiting system, a mobilization system, a reserve system
that can quickly, um, we can quickly expand our,
our numbers, uh, when required as we did during
previous major conflicts, that new involvement.
Um, so it's not just about starting that growth pattern now,
but making sure that we can, we can accelerate that, um,
when and if, if required.
And certainly encouraging to see attrition as eased.
And actually now net
and increase in personnel has come
to play again after a number of years.
E each of the options we've been considering in the DCP
have various, um, force structures, various layouts,
and each of those have a, a personnel number, uh, uniform
and civilian to, to go with those options.
So, um, that will all be reviewable when, uh,
once government is considered.
Thank you. Sorry, I I can respect this chair. We've
Sort of floated into some Bit. Yes.
Yeah. But I did have a specific question
around operations, and that was
'cause uh, CDF you mentioned the ability to introduce, uh,
the new Hercules into fly into Antarctica.
Over the last 12 months, we've seen a pause
and a desire to recalibrate the Antarctic development,
development and our presence there.
Noting as well the strategic competition in that area
with respect to that operation.
'cause the face of that operation changed significantly
over the last 12 months. And can
You, As best you can foresee it
given those circumstances?
Yep. So there's a lot of factors driving the, um,
the Antarctic program and, um, secretary, uh, coming from,
uh, in Feb know and may be able to speak to it as well.
But you've got infrastructure changes, um,
got an Antarctic particularly for Scott Base and,
and New Zealand's own program.
You've got climate change
and the, um, the interest in, um, what Antarctic has
to offer in terms of scientific learnings on that.
Um, so Antarctic businesses, uh, is booming.
Um, and, uh, the
New Zealand Defense Force plays a huge role in, uh,
supporting the Antarctic, uh, science program.
And we're a gateway nation.
Um, McMurdo the biggest base in on the continent.
Uh, the US base is, um,
is only five kilometers from out New Zealand Scott Base,
and they use Christchurch as the, um, as their main gateway.
So it is, it is a big part of New Zealand, um, you know,
as well as our obligations for, for our sector.
So, but in terms of A-N-Z-D-F perspective, um,
it's our biggest operation, uh, currently.
Um, we have generally
around 200 people a year involved in supporting it,
whether it's air crew flying Hercules down there, um,
whether it's, um, H
and NZSL, which will be sailing down there, uh,
in the new year to take, um, fuel supplies down
to Scott Base and, um, McMurdo
and to move other suppliers and people.
Um, we have engineers that go down there to do, uh,
deconstruction, um, uh, removal of various things,
maintenance jobs.
Um, we have a, a myriad of support staff
that go down there in all shapes
and forms, whether it's cargo handling, refuels, um,
just on the flights.
Uh, we are doing, we're undertaking 16 flights this year,
which is higher than average.
Last year, I think there was 18 flights.
Um, if you go back, uh, 20 years
and I've been flying to, to the continent, um,
since my early days, um, you know, it would,
it would be common to see 12 to 14 flights.
So that gives you an indication of
how much stuff needs to be moved there.
Some of those flights have been search and rescues,
and this year we have conducted, um, three, uh,
rescue missions to Antarctica.
One of them was in June.
That was a very, very challenging midwinter rescue of a,
uh, an American citizen.
Um, but to do three in one year is just unheard of.
So, um,
and a lot of countries rely on us to, um,
because we are the closest to be able to do that.
So maintaining that antarctic capability, particularly
for flying for our ships that go down there, uh,
it's a big part of what we do at our train.
So, on that, are you able to meet the requests made
through the joint logistics pool?
Yes. Yep. There are many challenges, including weather.
We had a, we had a, um, a no go mission this morning
with one of the new Jays.
It was, um, due to fly down this morning, uh,
and it couldn't go because of weather.
And, uh, same with the CUSC 17 was affected
by the same weather and they couldn't go either.
Um, I think we had the same situation yesterday.
So, um, weather is, is a factor with our old Hercules
that we are replacing, uh, technical reliability.
You, you need a, an aircraft that is absolutely in top notch
and with all systems go to be able to, to fly down there.
Um, and we would never go past a certain point
unless the aircraft was in absolute top shape.
But, um, we were seeing, you know,
with the 60-year-old aircraft,
we were seeing 60-year-old problems with the new Hercules.
Um, that was the same old problem, you know,
same old problem in terms of comfort levels for passengers,
but in terms of reliability, you, you know,
you see amazing reliability outta these new aircraft.
Very cool. You got your hands on controls yet?
I, um, not, not yet.
I, I went for a fly on the day that, um, they arrived.
I, I sat down the back, um, with, uh, the secretary
and with the chief of Air Force and, um,
and let others go up the front.
Um, but a hers, a herc, it's, it's not that important to me
what the, uh, what the c**k looks like.
It's more what it can do. And these new hers carry more
cargo further, faster, cheaper.
And that's the, um, that's what it's all about.
Alright, we'll move into the, uh, final section, um,
on specific issues, general, uh,
other questions of any areas?
I, I put it for primary a while bounce. Oh, sorry,
I can't quite catch the bottom
of the screen, so apologies.
I'm not, I'm not catching all of them. Um, Tiano. Ano,
Yeah. Yeah, I like that last
comment. A her a her.
That's probably the quote of the quote of the day.
Uh, thank you very much for the, for the comments so far.
Um, and for clarifying your role and my participation and,
and Aus um,
and appropriate alignment, I found that really, uh, useful.
Uh, I just wanted to track back to some of the, the, uh,
around what we were talking about in terms of, of space, uh,
'cause what we did note that, um,
without any specific space related budget
or performance measures in the 2020 3 24 annual report,
how will you intend to evaluate
and report the effectiveness of space policy initiatives?
If the member doesn't mind, I'll get back to him
with a comprehensive answer.
I'm just not well placed to a, to, to respond to that.
But we'll bring budget and performance measures
and assessment into a common reply to you if
that's satisfactory.
Uh, and maybe, maybe there's one part you could answer.
And that was around, um, like that staff component
and other resources being re re uh, potential reprioritized
to, to work on these space issues.
Has that happened or is
I, I like, I I can only answer that question from the,
the point of view of the ministry, which is we've, we, we,
we haven't brought on any extra staff to Okay.
Uh, to deal with space.
It's, it's actually a relatively small part of our,
of, of our business.
It's a, it's a whole of government, um, uh,
uh, set of issues really.
So it touches defense,
but as I said earlier, it also touches mb um, uh,
and some of the, some of the science agencies.
So we, we, for our part have not had to over
invest in the space.
Space. I can't speak for my, for the CDF,
It's a very low impact.
Um, CS o is a, is a, is a, is a forum.
So it's something you go and, uh, attend.
Uh, and terms of, uh, operational Olympic defender,
we are talking about one, uh, person from the airport,
One person deploying that.
I would say that's, that's the, uh, initial,
um, level.
Uh, I would hope we'd be open to increasing that, um,
if, if required, um, in the future,
depending on the circumstances.
The, just in terms of space in, in general, as with, uh,
most countries around the world, they are standing up a, um,
separate, uh, space capabilities, um, in some countries
that amounts to a space force.
Um, in New Zealand, uh, we, we are doing it,
doing it in a different scale.
And so the chief of Air Force, uh, represents head
of space in terms of New Zealand's, um, focus
and contributions now that, um, that, uh,
there's quite a lot of work in that to get, um, uh,
some initial, uh, runs on the board and make some progress.
Um, but I have to say, you know, that's being done in house
with, um, existing resources within the,
I there, when, when you track back with some
of those answers, if you could like, have some suggestions
of some performance measures that we as a committee could
possibly, uh, think about as well in terms of marking
how tracking that bit of work.
Uh, 'cause you know, I mean, uh, my sense is this is a,
is a, is a, is a growing area.
And given, you know, like the, as as was said around,
uh, the deterioration of our strategic significance
or whatever it is, it would be important to make sure
that there is advice on policy settings.
Um, knowing and, and,
and knowing that we have in the past
launched things on behalf of the US military is that would,
how would that contribute, uh, to our, um, our
strategic, uh, capability or significance in other ways.
So sort of finding ways that we can actually, uh,
take a good look at that would be useful.
I've registered that bearing in mind.
Um, and the way you have couched that is helpful.
Uh, the CDF
and I represent this, uh, this sphere of activity
to a very narrow lens called defense.
Um, and that's the, that that's the aperture
with which we would intend to reply back to you,
but you've couched in those terms yourself.
So that's helpful to us, I think.
Thank You,
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much.
Um, uh, first, can I recognize c, d, F
and ca for attending, um, bomb gilly's, uh, tongue,
uh, a rather one those ous occasions, remember?
We, we were, he passed
and such a, such a, if you will, a window into our, our,
our past, uh, passing on.
Uh, I wondered if you had, uh,
and second to that is a big thank you to the NZDF
'cause I know for years you've supported
Bob Gillis at different events.
He's traveled as representative for our country,
but also for N-Z-D-F-C-D-F-I spotted you there.
Uh, I was busy, hardworking in the kitchen.
Um, but I wonder if you had, uh, any reflections CDF about,
I mean, that there was, for a lot of us, a lot
of New Zealanders, Kiwis,
and even international communities,
that was a significant thing.
I wonder if you'd just share a couple of afflictions.
Um, absolutely. I mean, he, he meant a lot to us.
Um, 28th Maori Battalion was, um, a huge part
of our war effort.
Um, and, uh, in terms of our spirit, our culture, uh,
is very meaningful and certainly, uh, tar bomb, um,
uh, epitomized that, uh, particularly in its later years
as the last, uh, survivor.
So, uh, monumental, you know, we, we had the, um,
the unveiling of the new, um, kings colors down at, uh,
Burnham, uh, only, uh, last month.
Um, and we were, we were hoping, um,
ban was gonna be able to attend,
but was not enough to attend, but some of his whanau did.
And it was very meaningful, uh, to them,
but particularly to see some of the insignia on the, um,
on the regiments, uh, banners that reflected, uh,
28th Mara Battalion and,
and the wars that were, were fought in.
Mm-Hmm. Um, so, so very meaningful.
But he was there with us, um, in the spirit
and hopefully watching on, um, uh, watching on live, uh,
stream, but, uh, really palpable.
And, you know, this very near a day goes by at the moment
where he, his name, uh, and his, and his, uh, history
and his contributions are not, uh, mentioned particularly
as we go into the Y 2,500, uh, co-op inquiry
for the next phase, uh, where he was instrumental at,
um, at driving that.
Perfect. Yeah. Thank you.
Very good. Um, any other final questions from members?
It's been long session, Robert.
Excellent, Brian. Well, look,
can I thank you both very much
and your wider team for coming in today?
We appreciate the opportunity to scrutinize the activity
of both MOD and NDDF,
and I would like to acknowledge all of the incredible work
that's happened over the last year
under review in particular.
But of course, beyond that as well, our defense personnel
and ministry staff continue to do an amazing job
and really appreciate everything that they do on our behalf.
Now. They're working out there in tough condition,
not always paid the most, and they get on
and do the job with a great sense of pride
and professionalism that is
greatly appreciated from all of us.
Thank you Chair, and thank you members.
And again, um, can I please thank you, um, uh,
and I really mean it on behalf of all of the members of the
Defense force, um, for your, for your questions
and the issues you've raised, um,
and, uh, getting the pressure on us to do the right thing
by our people, um,
and what we are here to do. So thank you.
Serious conversation about serious issues.
I don't think as officials we could ask more than that.
So I thank you all very much indeed. Wonderful. Thank.